<!-- page: 1 -->

# Does Does This This Patient Patient Have Have an an Abnormal Abnormal Systolic systolic[Murmur?] Murmur? Edward Edward Etchells, Etchells, MD, MD, MSc; MSc; Chaim Chaim Bell, Bell, MD; MD; Kenneth Kenneth Robb, Robb, MD MD Our Our objective objective was was to to review review the the available available evidence evidence of of the the precision precision and and accuaccuyou you wonder[wonder] if[if] you you should[should] recommend[recommend] racy racy[of] of the[the] clinical[clinical][examination] examination[for] for abnormal[abnormal] systolic systolic[murmurs.] murmurs. We[We] conducted[conducted] endocarditis endocarditis prophylaxis prophylaxis or or delay delay cyscys¬ aauthors a conducted authorsserversconducted servers MEDLINE MEDLINE and andof of published publishedusing using graded gradedsearch, search, cardiologist cardiologist for for studies. studies. manually manually methodologic methodologicEachexaminers. Eachexaminers. reviewed reviewed study study quality. quality. was was[In] In[all] allthe the We Weindependently independentlyreference referenceclinical clinical found found setting, setting, that that lists, lists, most mostreviewed reviewedthe the and and studies studies reliability reliability contacted contacted by 2 by were 2were obobof of _ tained.fF 7°t toscopy toscopytained.fornot the the be be Postponed. postponed. The The procedure procedure until[until] patient patient an[an] echocardiogram echocardiogram and and has has would would traveled traveled prefer prefer 50 50 is[is] kmob[ob¬] km it it detecting detecting systolic systolic[murmurs] murmurs[was] was fair[fair] (k, (x, 0.30-0.48). 0.30-0.48).[The] The[most] most useful[useful] findings findings for[for] WHY WHY IS IS THE THE CLINICAL CLINICAL ruling ruling[in] in[aortic] aortic stenosis[stenosis][are] are a[a][ slow] slow[rate] rate[of] of[rise] rise[of] of[ the] the[ carotid] carotid pulse pulse (positive (positive like[like-] EXAMINATION EXAMINATION IMPORTANT IMPORTANT lihood lihood ratio, ratio, 2.8-130), 2.8-130), mid mid to to late late peak peak intensity intensity of of the the murmur murmur (positive (positive likelilikeliIN IN EVALUATING EVALUATING SYSTOLIC SYSTOLIC hood hood ratio, ratio, 8.0-101), 8.0-101), and and decreased decreased intensity intensity of of the the second second heart heart sound sound (posi: (posiMURMURS? MURMURS? tive tive likelihood likelihood ratio, ratio, 3.1-50). 3.1-50). The The most most useful useful finding finding for for ruling ruling out out aortic aortic stenosis stenosis Systolic Systolic murmurs[murmurs] can[can] be[be] an[an] imporimpor¬ is is the the absence absence of of murmur murmur radiation radiation to to the the right right carotid carotid artery artery (negative (negative likelihood likelihood — tant tant clue clue to to a a structural structural cardiac cardiac abnorabnor¬ accurately accurately ratio,hypertrophic ratio,hypertrophic 0.05-0.10). 0.05-0.10).[rule] rule cardiomyopathy, cardiomyopathy,[in] inSmaller, Smaller,[and] and[rule] rule lower-quality lower-quality and[out] out[and] echocardiographic[mitral] mitral echocardiographic[studies] studies regurgitation, regurgitation,[indicate] indicate mitral[mitral] tricuspid tricuspid[that] that valve[ valve] cardiologists cardiologists prolapse.regurgitation, regurgitation,prolapse. Wecan[can][We] _alitycardiacPhy, malitycardiacphy, has[has] (Table[(Table] testing, testing, increased[increased] 1).[1).] The[ The] such such usedramatically. dramatically.[use] as as of[ of] echocardiograechocardiogranoninvasive[ noninvasive] It[It] is[is] conclude conclude that that the the clinical clinical examination examination by by cardiologists cardiologists is is accurate accurate for for detecting dete ctim gq ©annpn various various causes causes of of abnormal abnormal systolic systolic murmurs. murmurs. Studies Studies of of the the clinical clinical examina[examina-] For For editorial editorial comment comment see see p 572. 572. tion tion by by noncardiologists noncardiologists are are needed. needed. a JAMA. JAMA. 1997,277:564-571 1997;277:564-571 —— astimated estimated that that 2% 2% of of the the general general popupopu¬ lation lation undergoes undergoes noninvasive noninvasive cardiac cardiac di¬ diYOU YOU ARE ARE ASKED ASKED to to see see a64-year-old a 64-year-old tion tionhas has anormal a normal rate rate ofriseandnormal of rise and normal agnostic agnostic evaluation.’[evaluation.1] In[In][ lieu] lieu of[of] performperform¬ man man who who has has been been admitted admitted to to the the or¬ or- _ volume. volume. The The orthopedic orthopedic surgeon surgeon is is concon¬ _‘ ing ing routine[routine] echocardiography echocardiography on[on] patients patients thopedic thopedic service[service] after[after] a[a] packing packing[crate] crate cerned cerned about about the the murmur, murmur, because because a a with with systolic systolic murmurs, murmurs, a a careful careful clinical clinical tipped tipped over[over] on[on] his[his] leg, leg, producing producing anun[an][un¬] _— recent recent patient patient had had suffered suffered a a postoppostop¬ examination examination may may eliminate eliminate the the need need for for stable stable fracture fracture of of his his distal distal tibia tibia and and erative erative myocardial myocardial infarction infarction (MI) (MI) and and _ additional additional tests tests in in selected selected patients. patients. fibula. fibula. You You see see him him as as he he is is being being pre¬ pre| was was subsequently subsequently diagnosed diagnosed with with aortic aortic THE ANATOMICAL AND pared pared[for] for surgery. surgery.[The] The patient patient previ: previ¬ stenosis. stenosis. The The surgeon surgeon wonders wonders if if sursur¬ THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ANATOMICAL ORIGINS AND ously ously[had] had[a] a[normal] normal[exercise] exercise tolerance[tolerance] gery gery[should] should[be] be delayed delayed until[until] an[an] echo[echo-] OF PHYSIOLOGICAL SYSTOLIC MURMURS ORIGINS and and no no cardiac cardiac symptoms. symptoms. You You conduct conduct cardiogram _cardiogram is[is] obtained[ obtained] to[ to] rule[ rule] out[ out] aortic[ aortic] OF SYSTOLIC MURMURS a a complete complete cardiac cardiac examination, examination, noting noting _—_ stenosis. stenosis. Heart Heart murmurs murmurs are are produced produced when when turtur¬ a a grade grade 2 2 systolic systolic murmur, murmur, loudest loudest at at Your Your next next patient patient is is a a 34-year-old 34-year-old — bulent bulent blood blood flow flow causes causes prolonged prolonged auau¬ the the lower lower left left sternal sternal border, border, whichdoes which does | woman woman with with recurrent recurrent cystitis cystitis who who will will ditory ditory vibrations[vibrations] of[of] cardiac[cardiac] structures.[structures.] not not radiate radiate to to the the right right carotid carotid artery. artery. be be undergoing undergoing cystoscopy. cystoscopy. She She has has no no _‘The The intensity intensity of of the the murmur murmur depends depends on on The The second second heart heart sound sound has has normal normal in¬ in- _ cardiovascular cardiovascular symptoms symptoms and and anormal a normal many many factors, factors, including including blood[blood] viscosity, viscosity, tensity, tensity, and[and] you you[do] do[not] not[hear] hear[a] a[fourth] fourth exercise exercise tolerance. tolerance. You You hear hear a a grade grade 2 2 _ and and blood blood flow flow velocity velocity and and turbulence. turbulence. heart heart sound. sound. The The carotid carotid artery artery pulsapulsasystolic systolic murmur[murmur] that[ that] begins begins late in[late][ in] syssys¬ _ In In addition, addition, the the distance distance between between the the vivi¬ tole tole and and is is loudest loudest at at the the lower lower left left sterster¬ brations brations and and the the stethoscope, stethoscope, the the angle angle nal border. When the is exam¬ at which the vibrations meet the stethenal border. When the patient patient is exam- _ at which the vibrations meet the stetheined in a the murmur From From the the Division Division of of General General Internal Internal Medicine Medicine and and ined ina standing standing position, position, the murmur Clinical Clinical Epidemiology, Epidemiology, Department Department of of Medicine, Medicine, UniUniincreases Increases m in intensity, intensity, and and you you detect detect a a versity versity[of] of Toronto;[Toronto;][and] and The[The][Toronto] Toronto Hospital, Hospital,[Toronto,] Toronto, loud loud systolic systolic click click just just prior prior to to the the onset onset The The Rational Rational Clinical Clinical Examination[Examination] section[section][editors:] editors: Ontario. Ontario.Corresponding ;[author:][Edward][Etchells,][MD,][MSc,][ The] ofvascular of the the murmur. murmur. examinationThe The is rest rest normal. of of the the You cardiocardio¬sus¬ Medical David David L.[L.] Center Simel, Simel, and MD, MD, Duke MHS, MHS,University Durham[Durham] Veterans[Veterans] Medical Center, Affairs Affairs Toronto Hospital, 200 Elizabeth St, eng-248, Toronto, OnDurham, NC; Drummond Rennie, MD, Deputy[Editor] tario tario MSG M5G 2C4 2C4 (e-mail: (e-mail: eetchells@torhosp.toronto.on.ca). eetchells@torhosp.toronto.on.ca). pect pect[mitral] mitral[valve] valve prolapse prolapse (MVP), (MVP), and[and] (West), (West), JAMA.[JAMA.] 

**Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 03/21/2016**

<!-- page: 2 -->

## Table Table 1.—Selected 1.—Selected Causes Causes of of Systolic Systolic Murmurs Murmurs 

## Table Table 1.—Selected 1.—Selected Causes Causes of of Systolic Systolic Murmurs Murmurs Table Table 2.—Typical 2.—Typical Location Location of of Maximal Maximal Intensity Intensity and and Radiation Radiation for for Various Various Types Types of of Abnormal Abnormal Systolic Systolic Murmurs Abnormal cardiac structure Abnormal Aortic Aortic stenosis stenosiscardiac structure —_—Location Location[of] of Maximal Maximal Intensity Intensity SSRadiation Radiation Typical Typical for[for] HypertrophieMitralMitral iedMitral valve valverégurgitation entationprolapse prolapsecardiomyopathy a Second Second right right intercostal[intercostal] space space RigtctavictoRight RightRight carotid[carotid][clavicle] artery[artery] Aortic Aortic stenosis stenosis Ventricular Ventricular septal septal defect defect Fifth Fifth or or sixth sixth left left intercostal intercostal space space Left Left anterior anterior axillary axillary line line Mitral Mitral regurgitation régurgitation (including (including Pulmonic Pulmonic stenosis stenosis mid mid left left thorax thorax Left Left axilla axilla mitral mitral regurgitation régurgitation due due to to Tricuspid Tricuspid regurgitation régurgitation mitral mitral valve[valve] prolapse) prolapse) Normal Normal Anemia AtrialAnemia Atrial cardiac cardiacseptal septal defect defect structure, structure, increased increased flow flow Lower Lower left left sternal sternal border border LowerEpigastriumFifth LowerEpigastriumFifth intercostal intercostal right right sternal sternal space, space, border border Tricuspid Tricuspid regurgitation régurgitation Thyrotoxicosis Thyrotoxicosis mid mid left left thorax thorax Beeertailure SepsisRenal failure with with volume volume overload overload Fath Fifthmid helt leftleft intercostal intercostalthorax space space Lower Lower left left sternal sternal border border Hypertrophic Hypertrophie cardiomyopathy cardiomyopathy TS De scope, scope,[and] and[the] the transmission[transmission] qualities qualities[of] of | sesses sesses both both the the rate rate of of rise rise and and the the pulse pulse murmur murmur is is not not heard heard immediately immediately upon upon the the tissue tissue between between the the vibration vibration andthe and the volume. volume. Experts Experts suggest suggest that that examiners examiners —_ auscultation, auscultation, but[but] only only after[after] the[ the] examiner[ examiner] stethoscope stethoscope affect[affect] murmur[murmur] intensity.2 intensity? pay pay special special[attention] attention to[to] the[the] peak peak of[of] pulpul¬ _ has has focused focused on on systole systole for for a a few few seconds; seconds; In In this this article, article, we we will will arbitrarily arbitrarily de¬ desation. sation. A A normal normal rate rate of of rise rise feels feels like like a a a a grade grade 2 2 murmur murmur is is heard heard immediately immediately fine fine an an abnormal abnormal systolic systolic murmur murmur as as one one __ sharp sharp tap, tap, while[while] an abnormal[an][ abnormal] rate[ rate] of[ of] rise[ rise] upon upon auscultation, auscultation, but[but] is[ is] not[ not] loud; loud; a[a] grade grade associated associated with with abnormal abnormal cardiac cardiac struc¬ struc- _ feels feels like like a a nudge. nudge. An An abnormal abnormal rate rate of of | 3 3 murmur murmur is is heard heard immediately immediately on on ausaus¬ ture. ture. We We will will not not consider consider the the diagnosis diagnosis _ rise rise can can also also feel like feel like a a weak weak tap, tap, followed followed _ cultation cultation and and is is loud; loud; and and a a palpable palpable prepre¬ of of systolic systolic murmurs murmurs caused caused by by abnor¬ abnorby byanudgeorpush.*[a] nudge[or] push.3 Surprisingly, Surprisingly, noclear[no][ clear] —_ cordial cordial vibration, vibration, called called a a thrill, thrill, signifies signifies mally mally increased[increased] blood[ blood] flow across[ flow][ across][ normal] normal _ guidelines guidelines exist[exist][for] for interpreting interpreting carotid[carotid] a a grade grade 4 4 murmur. murmur. Other Other murmur murmur charchar¬ cardiac cardiac structures, structures, such such as as in in anemia anemia or or volume. volume. Suggested Suggested methods methods include include palpal¬ _ acteristics, acteristics, such[such] as[as] pitch pitch and[and] tonal[tonal] qualqual¬ thyrotoxicosis. thyrotoxicosis. However, However, cliniciansmust[clinicians][ must] pating —pating the[the] artery artery with[with] both[ both] hands[ hands] and[ and] all[ all] _ ity, ity, have[have] not[not] been[ been] adequately adequately evaluated.[evaluated.] consider consider the the diagnosis diagnosis of of abnormally abnormally in¬ in- _ fingers fingers or[or] palpating palpating with[with] the[ the] thumb[ thumb] only.® only.6 Other Other evaluated evaluated relevant relevant features features on on creased blood flow in with We can offer that a normal carotid routine auscultation include the inten¬ creased blood flow in patients patients with sys¬ sys- | We can only only offer that a normal carotid routine auscultation include the intentolic tolic murmurs. murmurs. volume volume is is easily easily felt felt with with light light palpation, palpation, sity sity of[of] the[ the] second[second] heart[heart] sound[sound] (S,), (S2), the[the] SYSTOLICHOW HOW TO TO EXAMINE EXAMINEMURMURS(FOR) (FOR) while cultwhile cult to to a a feel feel reduced reduced even even carotid carotid with with firm firm volume volume palpation. palpation. is is diffidiffi¬A A Thefourth fourthThe intensity intensity heart heart of of sound, sound, S2 S, can can and and be be graded graded systolic systolic as as clicks. clicks. nornor¬ SYSTOLIC MURMURS rubber rubber bulb bulb and and balloon balloon attached attached to to a a mal, mal, decreased, decreased, or[or] absent.[absent.] A[A] normal[normal] S, S2 Most Most clinicians clinicians agree agree that that a a complete complete Pasteur Pasteur pipette pipette may may be be a a useful useful tool tool for for — should should be be easily easily heard heard in in the the second second right right clinical clinical history history and and physical physical examination, examination, teaching teaching[students] students the[the] carotid[carotid] artery artery and and left left intercostal intercostal spaces spaces next next to to the the including including a[a] detailed[ detailed][ cardiac] cardiac examination, examination, examination. examination.4 sternum sternum and and should should be be louder louder than than the the is is an an essential essential step step in in the the assessment assessment of of Brachioradial Brachioradial delay delay and and apical-carotid apical-carotid _ first first heart heart sound sound (SO (S)) in in these these areas.’ areas.4 AbAb¬ systolic systolic[murmurs.] murmurs. Clinicians[Clinicians][will] will[inter¬] inter| delay delay may may be[be] important important findings findings for[for] de[de¬] _ normal normal splitting splitting of of S, S2 in in relation relation to to carcar¬ pret pret a[a] systolic systolic murmur[murmur][ in] in an[an] asymptomasymptom¬ __ tecting tecting aortic[aortic][ stenosis.] stenosis. For[ For] brachioradial[ brachioradial] diac diac murmurs murmurs has has not not been been adequately adequately atic atic 24-year-old 24-year-old woman woman with with iron iron defidefi¬ delay, delay,[the] the examiner[examiner] palpates palpates simulta[simulta¬] _ evaluated. evaluated. ciency ciency anemia[anemia] differently differently from[from][a] a systolic systolic neously neously[the] the right right brachial[brachial] artery artery of[of] the[ the] A A fourth fourth heart heart sound sound is is a a low-pitched low-pitched murmur murmur in in a a 76-year-old 76-year-old woman woman with with fe¬ fepatient patient[with] with the[the] right right thumb[thumb] and[and] the[the] — sound sound occurring occurring just just prior prior to to systole, systole, ver, ver, weight weight loss, loss,[and] and digital digital[infarctions] infarctions _ right right radialartery[radial] artery ofthe[of][the] patient patient withthe[with][ the] sometimes sometimes described described as as a a presystolic presystolic after after recent recent dental dental surgery. surgery. left left index index and and middle middle finger. finger. The The examexam¬ _ sound. sound. Fourth Fourth heart heart sounds sounds from from the the left left Although Although[a] a complete complete[cardiac] cardiac examina[examina¬] iner _inershould should use use only only light light pressureonthe pressure on the ventricle ventricle are are best best heard heard with with the the bell bell of of tion tion is is important, important, the the reliability reliability and and ac¬ ac- _ brachial brachial artery artery to to avoid avoid dampening dampening the the _the the stethoscope stethoscope lightly lightly applied applied to to the the papa¬ curacy curacy[of] of many many individual[individual] components components of[of] | pulse pulse waveform.The[waveform.][ The] examiner[ examiner] attempts attempts __ tient tient in in the the left left lateral lateral decubitus decubitus position. position. the the cardiac cardiac examination examination for for systolic systolic murmur¬ to to detect detect a a delay delay between between the the brachial brachial Systolic Systolic clicks[clicks] are[are] high high pitched pitched sounds[sounds] murs murs have have not not been been adequately adequately evaluated. evaluated. artery artery[and] and[the] the radial[radial] artery artery pulsations; pulsations; with with a a duration duration similar similar to to heart heart sounds. sounds. For For example, example, the the only only adequately adequately evalu¬ evalu_ any any palpable palpable delay delay is[is] considered[considered] abnor[abnor¬] _— Systolic Systolic clicks[clicks] (previously (previously termed[termed] non[non-] ated ated individual individual element element of of the the cardiachiscardiac his¬ mal.7 mal.’ For For apical-carotid delay, apical-carotid delay, the the examexam¬ _ ejection ejection clicks)[clicks)] are[are] associated[ associated] with[ with] MVP.[ MVP.] tory tory related[related] to[ to] murmursis[ murmurs][ is] effort[ effort] syncope, syncope, iner __iner simultaneously simultaneously palpates palpates the the precorprecor¬ They They generally generally occur[occur][ later] later than[ than] 40[40] to[to] 60[60] which which refers refers to to a a transient transient loss loss of of concon¬ _ dial dial apex apex pulsation pulsation and and the the right right carotid carotid _milliseconds milliseconds after after the the first first heart heart sound, sound, sciousness sciousness during during effort effort or or exertion. exertion. This This artery. artery. The[The] examiner[ examiner] attempts attempts to[to] detect[ detect] and and patient patient position position greatly greatly affects affects their their article article focuses focuses on on features features of of the the cardiac cardiac a a delay delay between between the the apical apical and and the the caca¬ _ timing. timing. When[When] a[a] patient patient stands, stands, a[a] systolic systolic physical physical examination[examination] for[ for] systolicmurmurs systolic[murmurs] __ rotid rotid artery artery pulsation; pulsation; any any palpable palpable dede¬ _ click click moves moves closer closer to to the the S,. Si. Ejection Ejection that that have have been been adequately adequately evaluated evaluated for for lay _lay is[is] abnormal.®[abnormal.8] sounds sounds (previously (previously termed termed ejection ejection clicks) clicks) precision precision[and] and accuracy. accuracy.[A] A complete complete[de¬] deIn In contrast contrast to to the the cardiac cardiac history history and and come come from from aortic aortic or or pulmonary pulmonary valves valves scription scription of[of][the] the[cardiac] cardiac physical physical exami[exami¬] nonauscultatory nonauscultatory examination, examination, many many in[in¬] _ opening opening in[in] early early systole, systole, approximately approximately nation nation of of systolic systolic murmurs murmurs is is beyond beyond the the _— dividual dividual components components of of routine routine cardiac cardiac 40 40 to to 60 60 milliseconds milliseconds after after the the 8,. Si. The The S, S, scope scope of[of][ this] this article, article,[but] but can[can] be[be] foundin[found][in] —_ auscultation auscultation have been have been adequately adequately evaluevalu¬ and and an an ejection ejection sound sound together together have have various various textbooks.3"5 textbooks.” ated. ated. During During routine routine auscultation, auscultation, theexthe ex¬ roughly roughly the[the] cadence[cadence] of[of] saying saying "pa-da" “pa-da” or[or] The The cardiac cardiac physical physical examination examination in¬ inaminerattemptstodetectasystolicmuraminer attempts to detect a systolic mur¬ “pa-ta” "pa-ta" quickly. quickly.8 ? Patient[Patient] position position causes[causes] cludes cludes nonauscultatory nonauscultatory and and auscultatory auscultatory mur, mur,[which] which[can] can be[be] defined[defined] as[as] a[a] systolic systolic no no appreciable appreciable change change in in the the timing timing of of components. components. Adequately Adequately[evaluated] evaluated[non¬] non- _ noise noise witha with a duration duration longer longer than thanaheart a heart — ejection ejection sounds.[sounds.] auscultatory auscultatory components components[include] include[carotid] carotid sound. sound.9 Examiners Examiners describe describe the the grade, grade, After After routine routine auscultation, auscultation, the the clinician clinician artery artery palpation, palpation, apical-carotiddelay,and apical-carotid delay,[and] __ radiation radiation (Table (Table 2), 2), onset, onset, duration, duration, and and may may wish[wish] to[ to][ further] further assess[ assess][ a] a systolic systolic mur[mur¬] brachioradial brachioradial delay. delay. To To assess assess the the carotid carotid timing timing[of] of peak peak[murmur] murmur intensity intensity (Fig(Fig¬ | mur mur using using special special maneuvers. maneuvers. If If the the mama¬ pulse, pulse, the[the] clinician[clinician] applies applies both[both] light light and[and] _—_ ure). ure). The[The] Levine[Levine] grading grading system" system10 facili[facili¬] | neuver neuver is is intended intended to to increase increase the the inteninten¬ firm firm pressure pressure over over the the artery artery and and asas- _ tates tates description description of of intensity: intensity: a a grade grade 1 1 sity sity of[of] the[the] murmur, murmur, then[then] the[the] clinician[clinician] JAMA, February 19, 1997—Vol 277, No. 7 Abnormal Systolic Murmur—Etchells et al 565 **Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 03/21/2016**

<!-- page: 3 -->

NOGA URGES SSS SES RRA ONE Table Table 3.—Precision 3.—Precision of of the the Clinical Clinical Examination Examination of of Systolic Systolic Murmurs Murmurs Murmur Onset and Duration ————————_——_—_——— lees7 Holosystolic: Murmur No No murmur murmur vs vs Finding Finding grades grades 1-4 1-4 Cardiologists Cardiologists Examiner Examiner (tapes)? (tapes)21 No.100 No.100 0.48 0.48 K* Agreement,70 70 % 2aeasec Cardilogists® Cardiologists" 100 100 080 0.30 54 54 ; 1 2 a ——————— Cardiologists17 80 86 Cardiologists" 32 97 | cra Cardiologists’’ 80 ee 86 be Late Systolic Murmur CardiologistsNoncardiologists’® Noncardiologists" 3232 32 aLas 9778 S; Se No No murmur/grade murmur/grade[1] 1[vs] vs grades grades 2-4[2-4] Cardiologists Cardiologists (tapes)? (tapes)21 100 100 0.74 0.74 87 87 Timing of Peak Murmur Intensity —arioogists'® Cardiologists16 100 100 2D 0.29 76 Acoustic shape (late peaking rN Acoustic vs not shape late peaking) (late peaking Cardiologists19 22 0.74 | | Early Peaking Murmur Mid Midvs not Systolic Systolic late peaking) click click Cardiologists’?Cardiologists” Cardiologists17 2280 80 0.74vee 98 85 **5** Si S2 Ellipses *Ellipses[indicate] indicate data data[not] not[available.] available. Maneuvers which increase both venous affects all but 1 used | Mid or Late Peaking Murmur Maneuvers whichincrease both venous _ affects precision; precision; all but 1 study'® study18 used S; ‘~~ Ss, return return and and systemic systemic arterial arterial resistance resistance cardiologists cardiologists as[as] the[the] examiners.[examiners.] ees | include clude standing standing to to squatting squatting and and passive passive The The only only evaluated evaluated historical historical variable variable systolic Selectedsystolic Selected murmur, murmur,features features the[the] of of systolic[ murmur] murmur systolicbegins begins murmurs. murmurs. just just after[after] In In the the the[ the] holoholo- first[ first] tended tendedleg leg[elevation.] elevation. to to decrease decrease[These] These the themaneuvers[maneuvers] intensity intensity are[are] of of the the in[in¬] — whichfor forwhich diagnosing diagnosing had had a a x murmurs murmurs of of 1.0 1.0 (simple (simple is is effort effort agreement, agreement, syncope, syncope, heart heart sound sound (S,) (S,) and and continues continues throughout throughout the the sys¬ sys») | murmur murmur of of hypertrophic hypertrophie cardiomyopcardiomyop¬ 100%)in 100%)[in] 1[ 1] small[small] study study (n=22)."* (n=22).19 This This study study tole.time tole.time atpeaking atpeaking the the in Inof of middle middle the the murmur,the themurmur,late latesecond second of of the thesystolic systolic peak peak systole, systole,heart heart intensity intensity murmur, murmur, or sound sound or later, later, theis[is] the before[before] (S2). (S,). and murmur andmurmur endsIn In the ends[the] an an begins middle begins[middle] atthe atearly early the = athy tingside ting’Side athy : and of of[and] maneuver, maneuver, the the MVP.[ MVP.] patient patient For[ For] ?[the] the[ the] thestandingtosquatand and[clinician] clinician standing instructs instructs . sits[sits][to] him him to[to] squat¬ . the[the] or or ___ syncope, syncope, excludedcope excludedcope[that] that so patients patients[so] could[could] it[ it] . was[was][be] be with with relatively relatively confused[confused] other other . easytypes typeseasy with[with] for of of[for] effort[effort] synsyn¬ the[ the] of of the the systole. systole. In In a a mid mid or or late late peaking peaking murmur, murmur, peak peak her her to to rapidly rapidly squat squat from from the the standing standing _ cardiologists cardiologists to[to] agree agree on[on] the[ the] presence presence or[or] intensity intensity[is] is at[at][the] the middle[middle] of[of][the] the systole systole or or[later.] later. position. position. Changes Changes in[in][murmur] murmur intensity intensity absence absence of of effort effort syncope. syncope. are are noted noted immediately immediately after after squatting.14 squatting.“ One One study study found found that that the the agreement agreement should should listen listen at at the the edge edge of ofthe the murmur’s murmur's __ For For the the passive passive leg leg elevation elevation maneuver, maneuver, between between cardiology cardiology trainees trainees on on the the caca¬ radiation, radiation,[where] where[the] the[murmur] murmur[is] is barely barely an _an assistant assistant passively passively elevates elevates both both of of _ rotid rotid upstroke upstroke was was poor, poor, but but data data to to calcal¬ audible. audible. This This will will make make it it easier easier todetect to detect _ the the patient’s patient's legs legs to to approximately approximately 45de45 de¬ _—_ culate culate simple simple agreement agreement or x values or values were were an an increase increase in in murmur murmur intensity. intensity. Simi¬ Simi- _ grees grees while the[while][ the] patientissupine.Changes patient[is] supine. Changes _ not provided.” not provided.21 The The precision precision of of physical physical larly, larly,[if] if[ the] the[maneuver] maneuver[is] is intended[intended][to] to[de¬] dein in murmur murmur intensity intensity are are noted noted 15 15 to to 20 20 _ findings findings is[is] summarized[summarized] in[in] Table[Table] 3.[3.] thecrease crease clinician the the intensity intensity should oflisten of the the murmur, atmurmur,the then then of seconds seconds The Valsalvaafter after leg leg maneuverelevation.16 elevation. decreases ve¬ The Bottom Line . for Precision . the clinician should listen at the point point of The Valsalva maneuver decréases ve| The Bottom Line for Precision maximal maximal intensity. intensity. nous nous return return and and increases increases systemic systemic arar¬ The The precision precision of of examining examining for for any any Maneuvers Maneuvers that that primarily primarily increasethe increase the terial terial resistance.? resistance.3 The The Valsalva Valsalva maneumaneu¬ _ systolic systolic murmur[murmur] is[is] moderate[moderate] using using au[au¬] venous venous return return include include quiet quiet inspiration inspiration ver ver decreases decreases the the intensity intensity of of aortic aortic diotapes diotapes (x, ( , 0.48), 0.48), but[but] only only fair[fair] in[in] the[the] and and sustained sustained abdominal abdominal pressure. pressure. These These stenosis stenosis murmurs. murmurs. The The patient patient strains strains _ clinical clinical setting setting (x, ( , 0.30). 0.30). The The precision precision of of maneuvers maneuvers are are intended intended to to increase increase the the against against[a] a[closed] closed glottis glottis for[for] 20[20] seconds, seconds, examining examining for[for] a[a] loud[ loud] (grade (grade 2[2] or[or] louder) louder) intensity intensity[of] of right-sided right-sided[heart] heart murmurs, murmurs, and and changes changes in in murmur murmur intensity intensity are are systolic systolic murmur[murmur] is[is] good good using using audio[audio-] such such as as tricuspid tricuspid régurgitation regurgitation (TR) (TR) or or noted noted just just before before the the end end of of the the 20-sec20-sec_tapes tapes ( , (k, 0.74), 0.74), but[but] only only fair[fair][ in] in the[the] clini[clini¬] pulmonic pulmonic[stenosis.] stenosis.[For] For[the] the quiet quiet inspi¬ inspiond ond period.15 period.° Patients Patients may may inadvertently inadvertently cal cal setting setting (x, ( , 0.29). 0.29). ration ration maneuver, maneuver, the the examiner examiner deter¬ deterdo doa a Valsalva Valsalva during during other other maneuvers, maneuvers, The The precision precision of of examining examining for for a a latelatemines mines the the effect effect of of quiet quiet inspiration inspiration on on | such such as as sustained sustained abdominal abdominal pressure pressure _ peaking peaking systolic systolic murmur[murmur][ is] is excellent[excellent] (k, ( , the the intensity intensity of of the the murmur.11 murmur." The The ex¬ exor or standing standing to to squatting, squatting, so so clinicians clinicians _0.74). 0.74). aminer aminer should should not not ask ask the the patient patient to to should should ensure ensure that patients that patients breathe breathe nornor¬ The The precision precision of of examining examining for for a a syssys¬ breathe breathe deeply, deeply, because because the the murmur murmur will will mally mally during during these[these][latter] latter maneuvers.[maneuvers.] tolic tolic click click is is good good (simple (simple agreement, agreement, 85%). 85%). be obscured by the breath sounds. For be theneuver, neuver, obscured sustained the[the][examiner] examinerbY abdominal ilominal[exerts] exerts pressure peoseurefirm, firm,[sus¬] susma¬ Mor |RELATED PRECISIONRELATED PRECISION TO TO OF OF SYSTOLIC SYSTOLIC THE THE EXAMINATION EXAMINATION MURMURS MURMURS ACCURACY ACCURACY RELATED RELATED TO TO OF OF SYSTOLIC SYSTOLIC THE THE EXAMINATION EXAMINATION MURMURS MURMURS tained tained pressure pressure inward and inward and cephalad cephalad bebe¬ Precision Precision refers refers to to agreement agreement between between To To develop develop a a structured structured search search stratstrat¬ low low the the right right costal costal margin. margin. Theintensity The intensity _ clinicians clinicians regarding regarding a a particular particular clinical clinical egy, egy, we[we] used[used] pertinent pertinent articles[articles] already already of of the the murmur murmur is is noted noted during during several several _ finding. finding. The[The] precision precision of[of] the[ the] clinical[clinical] ex[ex¬] _in in our our files. files. Our Our strategy strategy was was deliberdeliber¬ cardiac cardiac cycles.12 cycles.” amination amination for for systolic systolic murmurs murmurs has has been been _ ately ately broad[broad] in[ in] order[ order] to[ to][ minimize] minimize the[ the] pospos¬ Transient Transient arterial arterial occlusion occlusion primarily primarily evaluated evaluated in in usual usual clinical clinical circumstances circumstances __ sibility sibility of[of] overlooking overlooking important important articles.[articles.] increases increases systemic systemic arterial arterial resistance. resistance. by by auscultating auscultating patients16"19 patients'*!® or[or] in[in] con[con¬] |We We then then searched searched MEDLINE MEDLINE (English (English This This maneuver maneuver increases increases the the intensity intensity _ trolled trolled nonclinical nonclinical circumstances circumstances by by lislis¬ language) language) from[from] 1966[1966] through through January January of of left-sided left-sided regurgitant régurgitant murmurs, murmurs, such such _ tening tening to[to] prerecorded prerecorded audiotapes.”Studaudiotapes.20[Stud¬] _ 1996, 1996, using using our[our] structured[structured] search[search] strat[strat¬] as as mitral mitral regurgitation(MR)orventricurégurgitation (MR) or ventricu¬ ies ies using using audiotapes audiotapes will will yield yield higher higher egy egy (available[(available] on[on] request). request). We[We] manually manually lar lar septal septal defect. defect. The The examiner examiner inflates inflates _ estimates estimates of ofprecision, precision, as as willstudiesconwill studies con¬ | reviewed reviewed potentially potentially relevant relevant articles articles simultaneously simultaneously 2[2] sphygmomanometers sphygmomanometers sisting sisting[of] of only only[normal] normal patients patients or[or] very very _ that that we we identified; identified; we we also also reviewed reviewed the the placed placed[around] around[each] each[of] of the[ the] patient's patient’s up¬ upabnormal abnormal patients. patients. Most Most of of the the available available _reference reference lists lists of of these these articles. articles. We We concon¬ per per arms[arms] to[ to] approximately approximately 20[20] to40mm[ to][40][mm] __ precision precision[studies] studies include[include] patients patients with[with] — tacted tacted authors authors of of relevant relevant studies studies for for adad¬ above above the the previously previously recorded recorded systolic systolic various various causes causes of of abnormal abnormal systolic systolic murmur¬ _ ditional ditional information. information. blood blood pressure pressure of of the the patient. patient. Twenty Twenty murs, murs, although although[1] 1 study study included[included] only only papa¬ Studies Studies were were reviewed reviewed by by 2 2 indepenindepen¬ seconds seconds after after cuffinflation, cuff inflation, any any changes changes _ tients tients with with mild mild or or moderate moderate aortic aortic steste¬ dent dent readers readers (E.E. (E.E. and and C.B.). C.B.). DisagreeDisagree¬ in in murmur murmur intensity intensity are are noted.13 noted." nosis.19 nosis.!° The The experience experience of of observers observers likely likely | ments between ments between reviewers reviewers were were resolved resolved 

**Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 03/21/2016**

<!-- page: 4 -->

Table Table 4.—Accuracy 4.—Accuracy of of Clinical Clinical Examination Examination for for Table Table 5.—Accuracy 5.—Accuracy of of the the Physical Physical Examination Examination for for Detecting Detecting Aortic Aortic Stenosis Stenosis Detecting Detecting Abnormal[Abnormal] Systolic Systolic Murmurs[Murmurs] **e** eeener reer eee e Positive Negative OverallNae OverallAssessmentClinical Clinical LikelineodMech Likelihood(95% CI)[Ratio] Ratio | reat Quality Quality Grade Finding Finding RiNo Reference(No.[of] of Patients) Patients) Standard Likelihood ikelinood(95% (95% Ch) CI)Ratio* Ratio* Likelinced Likelihood (95% (95% Cl) CI)Ratiof Ratlot Quality Quality Grade Grade Abnormalmurmurs—“‘é‘ééO*~*~*~;~;”!”!”~*~*~*~*#*S‘iWOw Abnormal murmur Slow ratte rate of of rise[rise] of[of] carotid carotid StudyStudy StudyStudy 22+ 225t 123[123*] x »(14-00)oo x (14-x)(2.8-x) (2.8-0») CcA AC pulse pulseStudy Study 127[127] Cardiac Cardiac ; catheterization catheterization a (781) (781) 130 130 (33-560) (33-560) 0.62 0.62(0.51-0.75) (0.51-0.75) A Study Study 3°*$ 324 3.8 3.8 (2.8-5.4) (2.8-5.4) c C Study Study 278[228] Cardiac Cardiac catheterization catheterization (231) (231 ) 2.8 2.8 (2.1-3.7) (2.1-3.7) 0.18 0.18(0.11-0.30) (0.11-0.30) Ct C* Possibly Possiblymurmur abnormal[abnormal] Study Study 3°[319] Cardiac Cardiac catheterization catheterization (106) (106) 6.4 6.4 (0.8-45) (0.8-45) 0.73 0.73 (0.59-0.90) (0.59-0.90) C Study Study 1°5*[123*] 2.3 2.3(0.7-5.9) (0.7-5.9) A A Timing Timing[of] of peak peak murmur[murmur] Study Study 276§ 226§ 1.3 1.3(1.2-1.4) (1.2-1.4) Cc C intensity intensity Normal Normal murmur murmur Late Late peaking?” peaking27 Cardiac Cardiac catheterization catheterization (781) (781) 101 101 (25-410) (25-410) 0.31 0.31 (0.22-0.44) (0.22-0.44) A Study[123*] 0.0(0.0-0.4) A Mid Cardiac catheterization 8.0 OeStudyoud,Study StudyStudyStudy one425+376§ 224 326§425t one0.05 0.010.05(0.01-0.20) 0.3 0.3(0.1-0.6) (5'00-0.2)(0.1-0.6)(0.01-0.20) (0.00-0.02) CcCc6 CCC Decreased Decreased second second Study Study Mid peaking” peaking11 heart heart 1”?[127] intensity intensity sound sound or[or] absent[absent] CardiacCardiac Cardiac catheterizationcatheterization catheterization (781)(106) (781)(106) _8.0(2.7-23.0)50 50 (24-100) (2.7-23.0)(24-100) 0.450.13 0.13(0.07-0.24)0.45 (0.34-0.58)(0.07-0.24).. (0.34-0.58) -CA *Of *Of 103 103 patients, patients, 93 93 had[had] normal[normal] murmurs.[murmurs.] Study Study Study Study 228[22i] Cardiac Cardiac catheterization catheterization (231) (231) 3.1 3.1 (2.1-4.3) (2.1-4.3) 0.36 0.36 (0.26-0.49) (0.26-0.49) ct Ct cchocardioyzam doneechocardiogram.among pregnant Gl[CI] indicates[indicates] patients.[confidence] coniidence Reference[interval.] interval standard: Apical Apical carotid[carotid] delay? delay8 Cardiac Cardiac catheterization catheterization (44) (44) 2 : (24-2) (2.4-»°) _0.05(0.01-0.31) 0.05(0.01-0.31) standard: standard: $Of tOf}Of tOf 30[30] 1059[1059] patients, patients, echocardiogram. echocardiogram. patients, patients, 16[16] 100[100] had[had] had[had] normal[normal] norma![normal] murmurs.[murmurs.] murmurs.[murmurs.] Reference[Reference] Refer[Refer¬] CeFourthBrachioradial BrachioradialFourth he heart heart CRPsound sound21 delay’ delay7 CardiacEchocardiogram CardiacEchocardiogram Rp catheterization catheterization (58) (58) (781) (781) a)SCO6.82.5 6.82.5 DT(3.2-14.0}(2.1-3.0) (3.2-14.0)(2.1-3.0) AM.©63»369vn0.26 0.26(0.14-0.49) DR0.0 0.0 IDGAhdAGD(0.0-0.3){0.14-0.49) (0.0-0.3) CACcA ence ence ence ence §Of §Of standard:standard: standard:standard: 532[532] patients, patients, cardiacechocardiogram. cardiacechocardiogram. 378[378] catheterization. catheterization. had[had] normal[normal] murmurs.[murmurs.] Refer[Refer¬] ReducedPresence PresenceReduced Study Study 12[128] carotid carotid of of any any volume volume murmur?’ murmur21 CardiacCardiac CardiacCardiac ———SOCOCSOOCOcatheterizationcatheterization catheterization[catheterization] (781)(231) (781)(231 ) 2.42.3 2.42.3 (2.2-2.7)(1.7-3.0) (2.2-2.7)(1.7-3.0) 0.31 0.31 0.0 0.0(0.0-0.13) (0.0-0.13)(0.21-0.46) (0.21-0.46) Ct Cf A wasby bywas discussion[discussion] assigned. assigned. : before a[ before] Quality Quality :[a] final[ final] grades grades quality quality were were grade graasas¬ de Radiation Radiation StudyStudy StudyStudy 2'9[219][127] 12”to to right right carotid carotid CardiacCardiac CardiacCardiac catheterizationcatheterization catheterizationcatheterization (781)(106) (106)(781 ) 2.2 2.2 1.4 1.4 (1.2-4.2)(1.3-1.5) (1.2-4.2)(1.3-1.5) 0.100.39 0.390.10(0.13-0.40) (0.22-0.69)(0.13-0.40) (0.22-0.69) cA signed signed using using published published guidelines.22 guidelines.” Grade[Grade] Study Study 228[228] Cardiac Cardiac catheterization[catheterization] (231) (231) ‘1.5 1.5(1.3-1.7) (1.3-1.7) 0.05 0.05(0.01-0.20) (0.01-0.20) Ct C* A studies involve the blind A studies involve the independent, independent, blind Vaisavamanewer—S=~=<C*~=“‘~*‘“‘“‘CtiCttSWin With Valsalva maneuver comparison comparison of[of] sign sign or[or] symptom symptom[with] with a[a] intensity intensity is[is] decreased”?[decreased25] Cardiac Cardiac catheterization catheterization (50) (50) 1.2 1.2(0.8-1.6) (0.8-1.6) 0.0 0.0(0.0-1.6) (0.0-1.6} Cc number "goldnumber[standard"] of of consecutive consecutive[ of] diagnosis patients patients among suspected suspected[a] large {The tTheThe applicable applicableapplicable likelihood likelihood[likelihood] ratio ratio[ratio] when when[when] the the[the] finding findingfinding is is[is] absent. present.[absent.] CI indicates confidence interval. of of having having the the target target condition. condition. Grade Grade B Grade ^Grade A[A] study study except except cardiac[cardiac] catheterization[catheterization] interpreted interpreted with[with] knowledge knowledge of[of] clinica![clinical] findings. findings. studies studies involve involve the the independent, independent, blind blind comparison comparison of[of] sign sign or[or] symptom symptom with[with] a[a] tion tion of of patients patients needing needing further further testing testing with with a asystolic systolic murmur murmur effectively effectively rules rules gold gold standard[standard][ of] of diagnosis diagnosis among among asmall[a][ small] __to to confirm confirm or or quantify quantify an an abnormality. abnormality. _in in aortic aortic stenosis stenosis (positive (positive likelihood likelihood rara¬ number number of of consecutive consecutive patients patients suspected suspected Several Several studies studies evaluated evaluated the the accuracy accuracy _ tio, tio, ©; °°; 95%[95%] confidence[ confidence] interval[ interval] [CI], [CI], 1.3[1.3-] of of having having the the target target condition. condition. Grade Grade C C _ of of the the entire entire clinical clinical examination, examination, includinclud¬ ~) °°) but[but] absence[absence] of[of] effort[ effort] syncope syncope is[is] not not studies studies involve involve the the independent, independent, blind blind ingthehistory, physicalexamination,elecing[the] history, physical examination,[elec¬] helpful helpful (negative (negative likelihood[likelihood] ratio, ratio, 0.76; 0.76; comparison comparison of[of] sign sign or[or] symptom symptom with[with] a[a] _ trocardiogram,and trocardiogram,[and] chest[ chest] radiograph;none radiograph;[none] 95% 95% CI, CI, 0.67-0.86)(grade 0.67-0.86)(grade C C study).'® study).19 gold gold standard[standard] of[of] diagnosis diagnosis among among[non-] nonhas has evaluated evaluated the the history history and and physical physical Several Several studies studies have have examined examined the the acac¬ consecutive consecutive patients patients suspected suspected of of having having examination examination alone.“** alone.23"26 In In each each study, study, carcar¬ curacy curacy of[of] the[the] physical physical examination[examination] for[for] the the target target condition; condition; nonindependentcomnonindependent com¬ _ diologists diologists used[used] the[ the] clinical[ clinical] examinationto[ examination][ to] detecting detecting aortic[aortic] stenosis.[stenosis.] In[In] these[these] stud[stud¬] parison parison of[of] sign sign or[or] symptom symptom with[with] a[a] gold gold classify classify[a] asystolic systolic murmur[murmur] as[ as] normal, normal, pospos¬ _ies, ies, echocardiography echocardiography or[or] cardiac[ cardiac] catheter[ catheter¬] standard standard of of diagnosis diagnosis among among a a sample sample of of _ sibly sibly abnormal, abnormal, orabnormal.Patientsthen[or][ abnormal.][ Patients][ then] — ization ization confirmed confirmed aortic aortic stenosis. stenosis. DefiniDefini¬ patients patients who[who] obviously obviously had[had] the[the] target target | underwent underwent an an echocardiogram echocardiogram or or cardiac cardiac __ tions tions of of aortic aortic stenosis stenosis varied, varied, with with peak peak condition condition plus, plus, perhaps, perhaps, normal normal individu¬ individu- _ catheterization catheterization as as the the reference reference standard standard _ instantaneous instantaneous gradients gradients ranging ranging from from as as als; als; or[or] nonindependent nonindependent comparison comparison of[of] a[a] _ test. test. The The most most common common abnormalitiesdeabnormalities de¬ low low as as 25mm 25 mm Hg Hg toas to as high high as as 50 50 mm mm Hg, Hg, sign sign or[or] symptom symptom with[with] a[a] standard[standard] of[of] un[un¬] _tected tected were were valvular valvular stenosis stenosis or or regurgirégurgi¬ _—_ and/or and/or aortic aortic valve areas valve areas ranging ranging from from as as certain certain validity. validity. tation, tation, atrial[atrial] or[ or] ventricular[ ventricular] septal septal defects, defects, low low as as 0.7 0.7 cm? cm2 to to as as high high as as 1.1 1.1 cm”. cm2. Many Many of[of] the[ the] studies[studies] were[were] conductedin[conducted][ in] MVP, MVP, and[and] cardiac[ cardiac] hypertrophy. hypertrophy. The[The] study study Many Many physical physical findings findings may may increase[increase] cardiology cardiology clinics, clinics, so[so] the[ the] prevalence prevalence ofab[of][ab¬] —_ results, results, which[which] are[ are] summarized[ summarized] in[ in] Table[ Table] 4, 4, —_ or or decrease decrease the the likelihood likelihood of of aortic aortic steste¬ normalities normalities in in these these studies studies willbe will be higher higher indicate indicate that that cardiologists cardiologists are are very very effieffi¬ _ nosis.19·27·28 nosis.!%?"85 Table Table 5 5 lists lists the the findings findings bebe¬ than than in in usual usual practice. practice. For For example, example, a a _ cient at cient at identifying identifying abnormal abnormal and and normal normal _—_ ginning ginning with[with] the[the] highest highest positive positive likeli[likeli¬] study study of[of] patients patients undergoing undergoing cardiaccath[cardiac][ cath¬] | murmurs. murmurs. hood hood ratios ratios from from the the largest largest studies studies with with eterization eterization for for suspected suspected aortic aortic stenosis stenosis The Bottom Line . the the best best methodological methodological quality. quality. All All of of found a of aortic stenosis of the studies used examiners. found73%, 73%,[so] soa[ a] a positiveprevalence prevalencepositive clinical[clinical] of aortic examination[ examination] stenosis vir[ vir¬] of | Thefor for Abnormal Abnormal Bottom LineMurmur Murmur theTwo Two studiesstudies studies usedare are cardiologist cardiologist notable notable for for examiners. their their high high tually tually ruled[ruled] in[in] aortic[aortic] stenosis.[stenosis.] In[In] usual[usual] A A clinical clinical assessment assessment of of “normal "normal murmur¬ — methodological methodological quality quality and[and] large large sample sample practice, practice, the[the] prevalence prevalence of[of] aortic[ aortic] stenosis[ stenosis] mur” mur" by bya a cardiologist cardiologist significantly significantly rere¬ _ sizes. sizes. The The first first study?’ study27 involved involved 781 781 concon¬ would would be be much much lower, lower, soa so positive a positive clinical clinical duces duces the the likelihood likelihood of of a a cardiac cardiac abnorabnor¬ _ secutive secutive unreferred unreferred elderly elderly patients patients who who examination examination would would not not rule rule in in aortic aortic steste¬ — ality. mality. were were nursing nursing home home residents. residents. Each Each study study nosis, nosis, but[but] rather[ rather] indicate[ indicate] the[ the] need[ need] for[ for] fur[ fur¬] A A clinical clinical assessment assessment of of “abnormal "abnormal participant participant received[received] an[an][ examination] examination by by a[a] ther ther testing testing with with echocardiography. echocardiography. murmur” murmur" by by a a cardiologist cardiologist significantly significantly single single senior[senior] cardiologist, cardiologist, followed[followed] by by an[an] IS IS THIS AN ABNORMAL MURMUR? increases increases the the likelihood likelihood of of a a cardiac cardiac echocardiogram. echocardiogram.had aortic stenosis Overall, Overall,defined 68 (9%)[68] (9%)as patients patientsa THIS AN ABNORMAL MURMUR? abnormality. abnormality. had aortic stenosis defined as a peak peak whether whether Clinicians Clinicians a a systolic systolic are are primarily primarily murmur murmur indicates indicates concerned concerneda a Aortic Aortic . Stenosis Stenosis . instantaneousmm instantaneousmm Hg Hg or or greater. greater. Doppler Doppler This This study study gradient gradient provides provides of of 25 25 a a cardiac cardiac abnormality. abnormality. In In this this context, context, the the Effort Effort syncope syncope is is the the only only adequately adequately reasonable estimate reasonable estimate of of the the accuracy accuracy of of the the goal goal of[of] the[ the][ clinical] clinical[ examination] examination[ is] is not[ not] an[an] — studied studied individual individual historical historical variable. variable. clinical clinical examination examination in in an an elderly elderly popula¬ populaexact exact diagnosis, diagnosis, but but rather rather identificaidentifica| Presence Presence of of effort effort syncope syncope in in patients patients tion. tion. Many Many of of the the patients patients had had no no sympsympJAMA, February 19, 1997-——-Vol 277, No. 7 Abnormal Systolic Murmur—Etchells et al 567 **Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 03/21/2016**

<!-- page: 5 -->

> Table Table 6.—Multivariable 6.—Multivariable Decision Decision Rule Rule for for Suspected Suspected Aortic Aortic Stenosis2' Stenosis” lihood lihood ratio, ratio, 2.4; 2.4; 95% 95% CI, CI, 0.72-6.9) 0.72-6.9) nor nor **e** ee e eee Aortic Stenosis* r ortic "aortic stenosis stenosis absent” absent" (negative (negative likelilikeli¬ -_——Aantic Stenosis" _ Likelihood Likelihood Ratio Ratio ‘hood hood ratio, ratio, 0.7; 0.7; 95% 95% CI, CI, 0.30-1.1) 0.30-1.1) was was acac¬ Point Point Score Score Yes Yes No No (95% (95% Cl)t Cl)t curate.*! curate.31 This This study study suggests suggests that that assessassess¬ 14 7 iy 00(06-0») x (0.6-~) ments ments by by cardiologists cardiologists may may be be better better than than 

> 10-13 10-13 22 22 v 8.0 8.0(1.6-46.0) (1.6-46.0) assessments assessments by by noncardiologists. noncardiologists. RU2-6 7-92-6 Fe 11 15 15 2.70.27 0.27(0.15-0.49)2.7(1.0-8.0) (1-08.02)(0.15-0.49) __ The The Bottom Bottom Line Line for for Aortic Aortic Stenosis Stenosis . The of of the TNT 0.10(0.01-0.58) 009 09 0 The presence presence any following JourBg Total eg 63 23 clinical clinical findings findings significantly significantly of any of the increases increases following the the —___Feducedlikelihood——_____Varlableterry, SlowReducedrate carotid carotid of rise volumeof volume carotidVariablepulse «int Point Score Score tery, cope, likelihoodcope,late timing or timing slow[slow] mid rateof of[rate] of[of] aortic aortic peak peak of[of] rise[ rise] murmurstenosis: stenosis:[murmur] decreased of[of] the[ the] intensity carotid intensity effort effort[carotid] synsyn¬ ar[ar¬] in[in] ___Murmur__ Slow MurmurDecreased Decreased rateloudest loudest ofor or rise absent absent at at of second secondcarotid second secondright right pulse heart heartintercostal Intercostal sound sound space spaceCCC3 CateCsrchioradial orchioradial absent absentor mid Sy, S2, delay. delay. systole, systole, apical-carotid apical-carotid decreased delay, delay, intensity intensity or or bra¬ braValve Valve calcification calcification on on chest chest radiograph radiograph 4 The The absence absence of of any any of of the the following following 

> Maximum Maximum score score 14 clinical clinical findings findings significantly significantly reduces reduces the the likelihood of aortic stenosis: 

> ^Defined *Defined as as peak peak transvalvular transvalvular gradient gradient of of >S0 >50 mm mm Hg Hg at at cardiac cardiac catheterization. catheterization. likelihood of aortic stenoSIS: any any systolic systolic fCI +CI[indicates] indicates confidence[confidence][interval.] interval. murmur murmur or or murmur murmur radiation radiation to to the the right right 

> Table Table 7—Accuracy 7.—Accuracy of of the the Clinical Clinical - Examination Examination for for Detecting Detecting Mitral Mitral Régurgitation Regurgitation carotid carotid Combinations Combinations artery. artery. of of the the following following clinical clinical Positive variables can be useful to rule in or rule ————————————_———— Negative variables can be useful to rule in or rule 

> Reference Reference Standard Standard Likelihood Likelihood Ratio Ratio Likelihood Likelihood Ratio Ratio Quality Quality out out aortic aortic stenosis: stenosis: decreased decreased carotid carotid 

> Murmur ar Study siend Finding Finding in im[136] mitral area[area] Echocardiogram: Echocardiogram:to to severe severe (No. (No. of Patients) MR MR[of] Patients)(394) (394)[moderate] moderate 3.9(3.0-5.1) 3.9 (95% (95%(3.0-5.1) Cl)* CI)* 0.34 0.34 (95% (95% (0.23-0.47) (0.23-0.47) Cit Cl)t Grade Grade c volumcreassecond volume,creasedsecond **e** d, right right or or delayed delayed absent absent intercostal intercostal S,, S2, carotid[carotid] murmur murmur space, space, upstr upstroke, l loudest and and **o** udestke, valve valve de[de¬] at at Study Study[235] 2° Cardiac Cardiac catheterization: catheterization: 3.6 3.6(1.9-7.7) (1.9-7.7) 0.12(0.02-0.50) 0.12 (0.02-0.50) Cc calcification calcification on on chest chest radiograph. radiograph. moderate to severe wee MR (35) Mitral Mitral Regurgitation Régurgitation eS AnyWith With Late Late acuteocclusion, occlusion, murmur[murmur][or] transient ortransient holosystolic holosystolic Ml37 murmur duringmurmur arterial arterial CardiacCardiac Echocardiogram:Cardiac Echocardiogram: SS tomoderateseverity severity severecatheterization:catheterization: catheterization:not[not] MRto[stated^] stated¢ severe(80) moderate[moderate] MR (206) 4.7(1.3-11.0)7.5 7.5 1.8(1.2-2.5) 1.8 (2.5-23.0) (1.2-2.5)(2.5-23.0) 0.66(0.25-1.00)0.28(0.13-0.60) 0.28 0.0 0.0 (0.13-0.60)(0.0-0.8) (0.0-0.8) Ccc vere examinationcardiograp(Table examinationcardiography(Table We Werégurgitation report report 7). 7). hyDetection[Detection] for for the the or[or] detecting detecting cardiac[cardiac] accuracy accuracyconfirmed of[of] moderate[moderate] moderate moderate catheterization[catheterization] of ofthrough the the clinical clinical to to to toecho¬ se-se[se¬] se¬ increases increases in in intensity25 intensity vere vere MR, MR, even even in in asymptomatic asymptomatic patients, patients, 

> *The *The applicable applicable likelihood likelihood ratio ratio when when the the finding finding is is present. present. Cl CI indicates indicates confidence confidence interval; interval; MR, MR, mitral mitral regurrégur¬ may may influence[influence] recommendations[ recommendations] for[ for][ echo-] echOgitation; gitation; and[and][Ml,] MI, myocardial myocardial infarction.[infarction.] cardiographic cardiographic monitoring,” monitoring,32 endocarditis[endocarditis] ^OutcometThe tThe£Outcome applicable applicable[of] of[interest] interest[likelihood] likelihood was[was] left-sided[left-sided] ratio[ratio] when[when] régurgitant regurgitant[the] the finding findinglesions,[lesions,] is[is][absent.] absent.including including _ mitral[mitral] ; régurgitation regurgitation or[or] ventricular[ventricular] ; septal septal defect.[defect.] prophylaxis, prophylaxis,33 Ifa If a car cardiologist diologisor[or] medical treatment.“t[medical] hears hears a a murmur murmur[treatment.34] in in the the 

> tomshaveand tomshaveandof ofsecutive secutive the theThe The the the elevated the elevated and no and second findings. findings. second positive positive patients patientsno audible audible study” thestudy28 likelihood ratios likelihood referred referred estimates estimates murmur, murmur, evaluated evaluated for for ratios of of cardiac cardiac which which specificity specificity 231 for for231 some some cathcath¬ may may con¬ con_ maneuver maneuveraortic aorticcisionalsisvalidation siscisionalvalidationA Awas was potentially potentially stenosis stenosis aid aiddeveloped developed (Table (Table for reduced reduced for diagnosing diagnosing useful useful (Table (Table 6).¥ 6).28using using Thethe theThe multivariable multivariable 5). 5). study study likelihood likelihood aortic aortic split-sample split-sample showed showed stenosteno¬ dedeof of voatalincreasedyyyogholosystolic_jixelihood mitralincreasedmurholosystoliclikelihoodcostalof MR.17·35·36 ypsignificantly significantly space), space)1735.36 area slightly, slightlyof of murmur[murmur] (mid MR, MR, Similarly, Similarly, then then “reduces left thereduces but but but thebutslightly slightly likelihoodthorax, absenceHctinoodabsence absenceabsence a a late late the the increases[increases] fifth systolic systolic likelihood likelihood mofof ofof of such a asuch MR Mi inter¬ murmur¬ the[ the] is or or isa a 

> lows lows eterizationsuspected eterizationsuspected or or cardiologists cardiologists[aortic] aortic for for various various stenosis.[stenosis.] reasons, examined examined reasons, Cardiology Cardiology including including patients patients[fel¬] fel- _ patients anpatients _an 10. 10. excellent excellentOf Of note, note, with[with] positive positive point 1 1 pointof of the the scores[scores] likelihood likelihood variables variables greater greater ratiofor ratio in in than[than] this this for —= ooqjyyrmurabsence hoodabsencemurmur of of MR. MR.of of significantly significantly a a In In murmur murmur the the setting setting reduces reduces is is less less of of acute acute useful useful the the likelilikeli¬ MI MI, for for priorfinedaatpopulationprevalence priorfinedaatpopulationprevalence 113 118 peak peak patients patients cardiac cardiacas as[to] to gradient gradient a a[cardiac] cardiac valve valve[was] (49%)was (49%)[of] catheterization. catheterization.[aortic] area areaof of[catheterization.] catheterization. highly highly had had 50 50 mm of of[stenosis] mm aortic aortic 0.8 0.8selected, selected, Hg Hg cm’ cm2 stenosis,destenosis, This This or or[was] or or greater, greater, Overall, Overall, less[so] so lessstudy study[much] de¬[the] the or or _ theresults.tientsundergoing themodelresults.tients modelaging, aging, While While lateral lateral with with[2] was was2 small[ small] the the The The severe precedingresultsareencourprecedingsevere chest chestaortic aortic[cardiac] first first studies[ studies] radiograph. radiograph. study study valve valvemultivalvular multivalvular[ had][catheterization] had results included included less[ less] calcification calcification impressive areimpressive encour¬ disease disease 75 75[and] papa¬ on on rulingrulingratio,arterialgitant—tyieylar rulingratio,arterialrulinggitanttricularInternal 0.66; in 0.66; out acute[out][in] murmurs, murmurs, septalocclusion occlusionseptal and[ and][acute] 95%[95%] medicine ruling ruling defect defect.29 MRCI, CI,[MR] such[such] was was out0.25-1.0)." 0.25-1.0).37 (negative[out] (negativehousestaff 2very very left-sided[ left-sided] as[as] MR[MR] accurate accurate likelihoodTransient[Transient][likelihood] and[and] are regurrégur¬ ven[ven¬] less for for 

> waswhoticipants whoticipantswas higher higherclinical clinicalThe The evaluated evaluatedexamined examined[than] than practice.accuracy practice.accuracy[with] with wouldof aortic[would] by by[a] a50 50 2 2of of variety variety be trained trained[be] nonconsecutive nonconsecutivespecial specialstenosis expected expected cardiologists, cardiologists,[of] of was maneuvers maneuvers[heart] heart[in] in much usual[usual] par¬ par[dis¬] dis_—_ ably3.7, foundnosisably3.7;ratio,these _ratio,theseundergoingfoundnosis 95%[95%][accurate] accurate of of 0.23; 0.23;patients patientsthat that aortic aorticCI, CI, 95%[95%] a acardiac 2.2-7.0; 2.2-7.0; cardiologist's cardiologist’s stenosis stenosis (positive (positive had hadCI, CI, severe severe 0.11-0.44).30 0.11-0.44).*catheterization negative negative was was likelihood[likelihood] multivalvular multivalvular only reason-clinical clinicalonly likelihood[likelihood] Many Manyreason¬ ratio, ratio, diagdiag¬ andof[of] —__ jo»theoodlikelihood ratiossg accuratethehoodtolikelihoodior 9neyrate 4.6 Internal4 residents) murmur residents)murmur 6 ratios ratios (for (for than than medical medical ratios ranging ranging medicine of of cardiologists cardiologists to to MR. MR, ranging ranging 1.0 students)1.0 students) from from(for (for with with housestaff from from 1.1interns interns1.1 positive positive for and and for (for (for 0.7 0.7 detecting detecting negative negative are interns) interns) (for (for and and likelilikeli¬ junjun¬ lesssese¬ 

> eases,ventricular eases,ventricular including including septal septal[aortic] aortic defect, defect, stenosis, stenosis, hypertrophie hypertrophic MR, MR, diagnosisdisease, disease,diagnosis[which] which[more] more may may[difficult.] difficult. have[have] made[made] A[A] study study an[an] exact[exact] of[of] 35[35] pio, niorThe residents)38 residents) Bottom Line ; (grade (gradefor MR A A study). study). 

> cardiomyopathy, cardiomyopathy, pulmonicstenosis,and pulmonic stenosis,[and] _ elderly elderly patients patients[with] with systolic systolic murmurs[murmurs] The Bottom Line for MR 

> TR.29 TR.” No No maneuver maneuver was was useful useful for for rul¬ rulwho who were were examined examined by by a a geriatrician geriatrician For For cardiologists, cardiologists, absence absence of of a a mitral mitral ing ing[in] in[aortic] aortic stenosis[stenosis][(data] (data not[not] shown), shown), —_ found found that that a a clinical clinical diagnosis diagnosis of of neither neither area area murmur murmur or or a a late late systolic/holosyssystolic/holosysbut but certain certain findings findings from from the the Valsalva Valsalva "aortic “aortic stenosis stenosis present"(positive present”(positive likelike__tolic tolic murmur murmur significantly significantly reduces reduces the the 568 JAMA, February 19, 1997—Vol 277, No. 7 Abnormal Systolic Murmur—Etchells et al **Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 03/21/2016**

<!-- page: 6 -->

> Table Table 8.—Accuracy 8.—Accuracy of of the the Clinical Clinical Examination Examination for for Detecting Detecting Echocardiographic Echocardiographic Mitral Mitral Valve Valve Prolapse Prolapse 

## likelihood likelihood of of MR, MR, except except in in the the setting setting of of Table Table 8.—Accuracy 8.—Accuracy of of the the Clinical Clinical Examination Examination for for Detecting Detecting Echocardiographic Echocardiographic Mitral Mitral Valve Valve Prolapse Prolapse acute acute MI. MI. Clinician Clinician Likelihood Likelihood Ratio Ratio Quality Cardiologists Cardiologists can[can] accurately accurately[distin¬] distinFinding Finding (No. (No. of[of] Patients) Patients) (95% (95% Cl)* CI)* Grade guish guish[left-sided] left-sided regurgitant régurgitant murmurs, murmurs, systolic Systolic click[click][and] and murmur[murmur] such such as as MR MR and and ventricular ventricular septal septal de¬ deStudy Study[152] 1° Cardiologists Cardiologists (401) (401) 19.0 19.0(4.6-80.0) (4.6-80.0) c fect, fect, using using[transient] transient[arterial] arterial[occlusion.] occlusion. Study Study 2[25!] Noncardiologists Noncardiologists (104) (104) 2.4 2.4(1.0-5.7) (1.0-5.7) c Noncardiologists' Noncardiologists’ assessments[assessments] for[ for][ MR] MR _ Systolic Systolic click[click] are are considerably considerably less less accurate. accurate. Study Study[152] 1° Cardiologists Cardiologists (401) (401) 12.0 12.0(5.4-25.0) (5.4-25.0) Cc Study Study[25=] 2° Noncardiologists Noncardiologists (104)[(104)] 1.3 1.3(0.7-2.2) (0.7-2.2) CG Tricuspid Tricuspid Regurgitation Régurgitation Nonejection Nonejection[click,] click,[with] with[or] or[without] without a[a] murmur[murmur] echocardiographytio, forwithtio, forwith severeechocardiography severe Cardiologists Cardiologists diagnosing diagnosing 10.1; 10.1; TR; n=295 TR;to to n=295 :[95%] 95%severe severe the the CI, CI, without without are[are] TR murmur murmur (positive (positiveTR5.8-18; 5.8-18; reasonably reasonably in in“ys TR) TR)patients patients negative negative of of likelihood[likelihood] fi referred referred moderately moderatelyaccurate.[accurate] (n=21, (n=21,[likeli¬] likeli- ra- for for[ra¬] MamanStudywns, Murmur,Murmur —————_——_StuyStudy Study Study StudyStudyStudyStudy 1° fis only 2°¢[2H][25i][152] ony[154][155][with][or] OF wou[without] a[a] systolic SystolicCardiologistsCardiologists cles click CardiologistsCardiologists CardiologistsCardiologistsCardiologistsCardiologists Noncardiologists Noncardiologists (185) (140)(140)(401) (140)(155)(140)(401) (259) (259) $<8.8NSB) 1.71 2.4 2.4(1.0-5.7)3.8 1.9 (1.3-3.0)1.2 1.9(1.3-3.0)1.2(0.9-1.5) (236.8)(0.9-1.5)(1.0-5.7) (1.3-2.1)(2.3-6.8) AccCc hood hood ratio, 0.41; ratio, 0.41; 95% 95% CI, 0.24-0.70)(grade CI, 0.24-0.70)(grade Stuay28—~CSC<CSCSOSSS Study[2SS] Ngncrrdiologists Noncardiologists (104)~*~<C«~ (104) 0.7(0.3-1.3) atey~C~C ful ful C).3G C). for for Special Specialdiagnosing diagnosing maneuvers[maneuvers] TR TR may and and may other alsoother[also] be[ be] rightright- helphelp¬ Nomurmur, NoStudy Study murmur,[154] 154 nosystliocick. no systolic click ~~SOSOC~C~SCSCSsSOSSSSCardiologists Cardiologists (155) (155) 0.04 0.04(0.02-0.11) (0.02-0.11) A sided sided lesions lesions such such as as pulmonic pulmonic stenosis. stenosis. Study2®~C“«‘“‘;CS~S*;*‘“‘s;*;*#*« Study[2K] Cardiologists (140) 0.26(0.12-0.54) One One study study (n=10 (n=10 with with TR TR or or pulmonic pulmonic Sudy3®=~=~*~*~C“~s*“‘*“S*S*S*:”:””””””SC‘:*Sardiotogists Study[35:] Cardiologists rio togists (401) (140) «0.26 0.21 (012-054) (0.15-0.29) stenosis; stenosis;[n=40][without][TR][or] pulmonic Study[45!] Noncardiologists (401) (104) —~=~*~<C*‘“«C DT 0.53(0.23-1.20) GOSLPDNS—S~C~S~S tS stenosis) stenosis) n=40 using without cardiologist TR or[examiners] pulmonic Study 4", Noneardiologists (104) «0.53 (0.23-1.20) Cc found found that thatusing an an increase increasecardiologist in in murmur murmurexanin¢ersc inten¬ inten____— *CI “Cl indicates indicates confidence confidence interval. interval. sity sity with[with] inspiration inspiration significantly significantly[raised] raised the the likelihood likelihood of of a a right-sided right-sided valvular valvular a amurmurdecreasedinintensity murmur decreased in intensity withpaswith pas¬ is is quite quite variable, variable, possibly possibly because because of of unun¬ lesion, lesion, whereas[whereas][ the] the[absence] absence[of] of increased[ increased] __ sive sive leg leg elevation, elevation, then then hypertrophiccarhypertrophie car¬ __ reliability reliability of[of] the[ the][ clinical] clinical examination[ examination] and[ and] intensity intensity made[made] these[ these] conditions[ conditions] lesslikely[ less] likely diomyopathy diomyopathy was[was] significantly significantly morelikely[more] likely differences differences between between studies studies regarding regarding the the (positive (positive likelihood[likelihood] ratio, ratio, 8.0; 8.0; 95%[95%] CI,3.5CI,[3.5-] (positive (positive likelihood[likelihood] ratio, ratio, 8.0; 8.0; 95%[95%] CI,3.0CI,[3.0-] definition definition of of echocardiographic echocardiographic MVP. MVP. An An 18; 18; negative negative likelihood[likelihood] ratio, ratio, 0.0; 0.0;95%[95%] CI, CI, 21); 21);[whereas] whereas if[if] the[ the][murmur] murmur did[did] not[not] de[de¬] __ isolated isolated systolic systolic murmur murmur has has little little effect effect 0-0.43) 0-0.43) (grade (grade C).” C).29[In] In another[another] study, study, pa¬ pa—_ crease crease in in intensity, intensity, the likelihood was sig¬ on the likelihood of echocardiographic tients tients with with severe severe MR MR (n=15) (n=15) or or TR TR nificantly nificantly reduced[reduced] the (negative (negativelikelihood[likelihood] likelihood wassigonMVP, MVP, thewhile[while] likelihoodabsence[absence] of echocardiographicof[of] both[both] a[a] systolic systolic (n=15) (n=15)[were] were[examined] examined by by experienced experienced ratio, ratio, 0.22; 0.22; 95%[95%] CI, CI, 0.06-0.77). 0.06-0.77). If[If] murmur[ murmur] __ click click and and a a murmur murmur appears appears to to reduce reduce the the cardiologists cardiologists prior prior[to][ cardiac][ catheteriza¬] intensity[was][decreased][or] unchanged likelihood of echocardiographic MVP. tion.12 tion.” To To distinguish distinguishto cardiacTR TR from from catheterizaMR, MR, in¬ inwith withintensitystanding standing was to todecreasedsquatting, squatting, orthen then unchangedhyperhyper= Noncardiologistslikelihood Noncardiologists of echocardiographicare[are] less[less] accurate[accurate] MVP.than[than] creased creased murmur murmur intensity intensity on on inspiration inspiration _ trophic trophic cardiomyopathy cardiomyopathy wassignificantly[was] significantly cardiologists cardiologists for[for] all[all] of[of] these[ these] findings. findings. had had a a positive positive likelihood likelihood ratio ratio of of[°°] < (95% (95% — more more likely likely (positive (positive likelihood likelihood ratio, ratio, 4.5; 4.5; Mitral Mitral valve valve leaflet leaflet redundancy redundancy or or CI, CI, 3.1-oc) 3.1-0c) and[and] a[a] negative negative likelihood[likelihood][ ratio] ratio 95% 95% CI, CI, 2.3-8.6); 2.3-8.6); while while if ifthe the murmur murmur inin¬ __ thickening thickening[are][ the] echocardiographic[vari¬] of of 0.20 0.20 (95% (95% CI, CI, 0.07-0.45). 0.07-0.45). For For the the find¬ find- _ creased creased in intensity, in intensity, the the likelihood likelihood of of hyhy¬ _—_ ables ables most most arestrongly strongly the echocardiographicassociated associated with with vari-adad¬ ing ing of[of][ increased] increased[murmur] murmur intensity intensity[with] with — pertrophie pertrophic cardiomyopathy cardiomyopathy[was] was signifisignifi¬ verse verse clinical clinical outcomes.>™** outcomes.57·58 In In 1 1 study, study, sustained sustained abdominal abdominal pressure, pressure, the the posi¬ posi- _ cantly cantly reduced[reduced] (negative (negative likelihood[likelihood] ratio, ratio, _ neither neither a a systolic systolic click click (positive likelihood (positive likelihood tive tive likelihood likelihood ratio ratio was was[==] (95% (95% CI, CI, 2.5-) 2.5-=*=) 0.13; 0.18;[95%] 95% CI, CI, 0.02-0.81)[0.02-0.81)] (grade (grade C).[C).] ratio, ratio, 2.8; 2.8; 95%[95%] CI, CI, 1.8-4.6; 1.8-4.6; negative negative like[like¬] and and(95% (95% the the CI, CI, negative negative0.15-0.58)(grade 0.15-0.58)(grade likelihood likelihoodC). C). ratio ratio was was 0.33 0.33 The The Bottom Bottom Line Line. for for Hypertrophic Hypertrophie . systoliclihood lihoodsystolic ratio, ratio,murmur[murmur] 0.76; 0.76; 95% 95% (positive (positive CI, CI, 0.69-0.84) 0.69-0.84) likelihood[likelihood] nor nor ra[ra¬] a a The The Bottom Bottom Line Line for for TR TR Cardiomyopathy Cardiomyopathy Cardiologists Cardiologists[can] can rule[rule] in[in] or[or] rule[rule] out[out] —_ hoodtio, tio,hood 1.3; 1.3; ratio, ratio, 95%[95%] 0.57; 0.57; CI, CI, 1.1-1.5; 1.1-1.5; 95% 95% CI, CI, negative negative 0.43-0.76) 0.43-0.76) likeli[likeli¬] afaf¬ Cardiologists Cardiologists can[can] accurately accurately detectthe[detect][ the] hypertrophie hypertrophic cardiomyopathy cardiomyopathy by by evalu[evalu¬] _ fected fected the the likelihood likelihood of of echocardiographic echocardiographic murmur murmur of of TR. TR. ating ating for[for] decreased[decreased] murmur[murmur] intensity intensity mitral mitral valve valve leaflet leaflet thickening thickening or or redunredun¬ Cardiologists Cardiologists can[can] accurately accurately[rule] rule[in] in _ with with passive passive leg leg elevation elevation or or increased increased _ dancy dancy (grade (grade C[C] study). study).69 and and rule rule out out TR TR using using the the quiet quiet inspiinspi¬ murmur murmur intensity intensity when when the the patient patient goes goes Several Several longitudinal longitudinal studies studies of of papa¬ ration ration and and sustained sustained abdominal abdominal pressure pressure from from a a squatting squatting to to standing standing position. position. tients tients with with echocardiographic echocardiographic MVP MVP have have maneuvers. maneuvers. Hypertrophic Hypertrophie Cardiomyopathy Mitral Mitral . The Valve Valve accuracy Prolapse Prolapseof the clinical examina¬ related relatedincluding development development baseline baseline[cardiac] of[of] adverse[ adverse] clinical clinicaldeath, progressive clinicalfindings findings[clinical] events, events, to to[MR] the the There There are limited Cardiomyopathy data on the accuracy tion The for accuracy diagnosing of the the clinical MVP examinacannot be _ including cardiac death, requiring surgery, endocarditis, progressive[and] MR sys¬ of of clinical clinical are examination examination limited datafor for on the hypertrophie hypertrophic accuracy __ defined,tion defined, for diagnosing[because] because[clinical] clinicalthe MVPfindings findings cannotalone[alone] be __ requiring surgery,temic temic embolism. embolism.0"·61 endocarditis, A A holosystolic holosystolic and murmur¬ syscardiomyopathy cardiomyopathy[(also] (also[termed] termed idiopathic idiopathic are are sufficient sufficient forthe for the diagnosisofMVP.A diagnosis of MVP. A mur mur without without a a systolic systolic click click significantly significantly hypertrophie hypertrophic[subaortic] subaortic[stenosis).] stenosis). Many Many patient patient withasystolic[with][a] systolic click[click] andasystolic[ and][a] systolic increased increased the the likelihood likelihood of of an an adverse adverse studies studies evaluate evaluate phonocardiography phonocardiography or or murmur murmur meets meets the the diagnostic diagnostic criteria criteriafor for | event, event, whereas[whereas] absence[absence] of[of] both[both] a[a] syssys¬ intracardiac intracardiac tracings tracings rather rather than than ausculauscul¬ MVP MVP even even if if the the patient patient has has a a normal normal __ tolic tolic click click and and murmur murmur was was associated associated tation,39"43 tation,“ while[while] othersincludefewerthan[ others][ include][ fewer][ than] echocardiogram.50·51 echocardiogram.” with with no no adverse adverse events. events. Other Other clinical clinical 15 15 patients.44"18 patients." One One study study evaluated evaluated ca¬ caHowever, However,[we] we[can] can examine[examine] the[the] rela[rela¬] findings findings had[had] little[little] effect[effect] on[on] the[the] likeli[likeli¬] rotid rotid sinus sinus pressure, pressure, which which is is not not rou¬ routionship tionship between[between] clinical[clinical] findings findings and[and] _ hood hood of of adverse adverse events events (Table (Table 9). 9). tinelyexamination.49 tinely recommended recommended for for the the clinical clinical echocardiographicWith echocardiographic findings findings (Table[(Table] a 8).°”°° 8).52"56 The Bottom Line . for MVP examination.” With cardiologist cardiologist examiners, examiners, a systolic systolic The Bottom Line for MVP Special Special maneuvers[maneuvers] may may helpdistinguish help distinguish click click accompanied accompanied by by a a systolic systolic murmur murmur A A systolic systolic click, click, with with or or without without sys¬ systhe the murmur murmur of of hypertrophie hypertrophic cardiomycardiomy¬ _ helped helped toruleinechocardiographic[to][ rule][ in] echocardiographic MVP.[MVP.] __ tolic tolic murmur, murmur, is is sufficient sufficient for for the the diagdiag¬ opathy.29 opathy.” Using Using cardiologist cardiologist examiners, examiners, if[if] | The The accuracy accuracy of of an an isolated isolated systolic systolic click click nosis nosis of of MVP. MVP. JAMA. Februarv 19. 1997—Vol 277. No. 7 Abnormal Systolic Murmur—Etchells et al 569 **Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 03/21/2016**

<!-- page: 7 -->

Table Table 9.—Accuracy 9.—Accuracy of of the the Clinical Clinical Examination Examination for for Predicting Predicting Adverse Adverse Clinical Clinical Outcomes Outcomes Related Related to[to] Mitral Mitral examination examination conducted conducted by by noncardiolononcardiolo¬ Valve Valve Prolapse* Prolapse* gists. gists. Some[Some] studies[studies] include[include] inappropriinappropri¬ OeFinding Finding (No. (No.Clinician Clinicianof of Patients) Patients) Likelihood Likelihood(95% (95% Cl) CI) Ratio Ratio |QualityGrade -—«as[ately] atelyas only only[ narrow][narrow] patients patients[ spectrums] spectrums with with moderate moderate[of][of][patients,] patients, : and and[ such][such] sese¬ Holosystolic Holosystolic murmur[murmur] vere vere aortic aortic stenosis.’*!® stenosis.7·8·19 Further Further studies studies Study Study[159] 159 Cardiologists Cardiologists (316) (316) 18.0 18.0(6.6-51.0) (6.6-51.0) c should should focus focus on on a a broad broad spectrum spectrum of of papa¬ Study Study[2M] 2° Cardiologists Cardiologists (321) (321) 5.1 5.1 (2.2-9.9) (2.2-9.9) c tients tients from from primary primary or or secondary secondary eare care LateClick LateClickStuy StudyStudy Study systolic systolic[and] and2[260][161] WO holosystolic holosystolic murmur[murmur] or[or] murmur1 murmur®? click click and and[murmur] murmur CardiologistsGartotogCardiologists CardiologistsCardiologistsCardiologists aists (976) (316)(321)(321) (321)(321) ROT) 0.8(0.3-1.5)0.8 0.80.8 1.2(0.7-1.7)(0.2-2.4) (0.2-2.4)(0.3-1.5) CcCc abnormal abnormal creased.settings,age settings,agecreased. of[of] 40[40] particularly particularly years years murmurs murmurs when[when] is is patients patients the[the] significantly significantly prevalence prevalence over[over] the[the] inin¬ of[of] Any Any[click] click or[or][isolated] isolated click[click] Study Study[161] 1° Cardiologists Cardiologists (316) (316) 0.4 0.4 (0.2-0.8) (0.2-0.8) Cc BACK BACK TO TO THE THE PATIENTS PATIENTS No - Swayjo Study clicK/no click/no[2M] 2 60 murmur murmur Cardiologists Cardiologistsi i: (321) (321) 0.26(0.05-1.10) 0.26 (0.05-1.10)= Cc Your Your first first patient, patient,. who who is is . awaiting awaiting age urur¬ Study[157] Cardiologists (237) 0.0(0.0-4.1) gent surgery[for][an] open fracture,[had][a] SS= Study StudyStudy[261] 2°1°” CardiologCardiologists Cardiologists **i** sts (316) (237)(316SS 0.0(0.0-1.4) 0.00.0 (0.0-4.1)(0.0-1.4__________________SRCcCc systolicthe the gent systolic right right ie°[murmur] carotid carotidomemurmur for: artery. artery. th[that] Openthat[did] The The did frnot[not] aru likelihood likelihood enradiate[radiate] hada of of to[to] régurgitation regurgitation *Outcomes *Outcomesrequiring requiring[include] include death[death] surgery. surgery.(cardiac (cardiacMost[Most] outcomes[outcomes][or] or all-cause, all-cause, were[were] depending dependingprogressive progressiveon[on] study),mitral study),[mitral] régurgitation stroke, stroke, itatiendocarditis, endocarditis,requiring iri or[or] surgery. progressive progressive .[CI] Cl[indicates] indicatmitral[mitral] aortic aorticthis +: stenosis stenosis : In is is significantly significantly+45 the reduced reduced carotid : by byar¬ confidence contidence interval. interval. ig surgery prog tral regurgitation requiring surgery indicates this finding. finding. In addition, addition, the carotid artery tery pulsation pulsation had[had][ normal] normal volume, volume, the[the] 8, S2 If If a a cardiologist cardiologist hears hears a a systolic systolic click, click, nosis, nosis, and[and] MR.[ MR.] Other[ Other] studiesincludeaortic[ studies include][ aortic] intensity intensity was[was] normal, normal, and[and] there[there] was[was] no[no] with with or or without without a a muimur, murmur, then then the the like¬ like- _ valve valvesclerosisas sclerosis as anabnormality,although an abnormality, although fourth fourth heart heart sound. sound. These These findings findings also also lihood lihood of of echocardiographic echocardiographic MVP MVP is is sig¬ sig- _ the the clinical clinicalimportance importance of of aortic aortic valvesclevalve scle¬ _help help to[to] reduce[ reduce] the[ the] likelihood[ likelihood] of[ of] aortic[aortic] ste[ste¬] nificantly nificantly[increased.] increased.[ The] The absence[absence][ of] of both[ both] rosis __rosis is is uncertain. uncertain. nosis. nosis. You You are are confident confident in in your your assessassess¬ a a systolic systolic click click and and murmur murmur significantly significantly A A venous venous hum” hum74 oramammary or a mammary souffle souffle | ment ment because because it it was was conducted conducted in in a a quiet quiet reduces reduces the the likelihood likelihood of of echocardio¬ echocardioare are both both normal normal conditions conditions that that present present room room witha with a comfortable comfortable and and cooperative cooperative graphic graphic[MVP.] MVP. either either as as systolicmurmursor,morecomsystolic murmurs or, more com¬ _patient. patient. You[You] can[can] advise[ advise] the[ the] surgeon surgeon that[that] In In patients patients with with echocardiographic echocardiographic monly, monly, as[as] continuous[continuous] murmurs.[murmurs.] aortic aortic stenosis stenosis is is very very unlikely. unlikely. MVP,systoliclikelihood MVP,systoliclikelihood[a] a[click] click holosystolic holosystolic of of significantly significantly long-term long-term[murmur] murmurcomplications, complications,[increases] increases[without] without the[the][a] a HOWIN HOWIN EXAMINING EXAMINING TO TO IMPROVE IMPROVE THIS THIS SKILLS SKILLS AREA AREA anding ingand Your Your MVP. a[MVP.] a systolic systolic second second[ If] If you you murmur, murmur, patient patient are[are] an[an] has has strongly strongly experienced experienced a a systolic systolic suggestsuggest¬ click click aus[aus-] whereas whereas absence absence of of both both a a systolic systolic click click The The characteristics characteristics of of murmurs murmurs canbe can be __ cultator, cultator, then[then] these[ these] findings findings significantly significantly and and murmur murmur significantly significantly reduces reduces the the _ learned learned using using cardiovascular auscultatory cardiovascular auscultatory _ increase increase the the likelihood likelihood that that the the echocarechocar¬ likelihood likelihood of of long-term long-term complications. complications. tapes tapes or[or][cardiac] cardiac patient patient simulators, simulators, al[al¬] _diogram diogram will[will][ show] show evidence[ evidence] of[ of] MVP.[MVP.] How[ How¬] WHEN WHENSYSTOLIC SYSTOLIC TO TO MURMURS EXAMINE EXAMINE MURMURS (FOR) (FOR) thoughuncertain.75,76panied thoughuncertain.”panied by by[the] the phonocardiographicand phonocardiographic[effectiveness] effectiveness Most Most audiotapes audiotapesareaccom- of[of] these[ these] are[and] accom¬ expert expert aids[aids] is[is] todiagnosemal, mal,to ever, ever, diagnose you you even[even] already already MVP. MVP. if[if] the[ the] Based Based echocardiogram echocardiogram have[have] onenough enoughon current current evidence[evidence] guide-is[is] guide¬ nor[nor¬] We We are are unaware unaware of of data data by by which which one one cardiologist cardiologist analyses, analyses,[so] so these[these] tapes tapes can[can] _ lines, lines, you you could[could] reasonably reasonably recommend[recommend] might might give give a[a][evidence-based] evidence-based[recommen¬] recommenhelp _help clinicians[clinicians][to] to[calibrate] calibrate their[their] ears[ears] to[to] —_endocarditis endocarditis prophylaxis.® prophylaxis:0 You You may may wish wish dation dation regarding regarding the the examination examination for for syssys¬ _ those those of of experts. experts. to to obtain obtain an an echocardiogram echocardiogram at at a a later later tolic tolic murmurs. murmurs. Auscultation Auscultation for for systolic systolic Most Most commercially commercially available available stethostetho¬ date date to to determine determine the the severity severity of of the the val¬ valmurmurs murmurs should should probably probably be be carried carried out out —_ scopes scopes[have] have[similar] similar acoustic[acoustic] properties, properties, | vular vular abnormality. abnormality. ining ining diovascular diovascular: any any patients patients patient tient:patient database databasewith[with] for forith whom whom[known] k is knownis necessary,includnecessary,a a complete complete[or] or suspected suspecte includ¬car¬ car-ted —_ t althoughlowtenance lowalthoughenance frequencies.” frequencies.77 some[some] is is: essential, essential, have[ have] Good Good tial. poor poor stethoscope stethoscope b because performancebecause performance dirt dirt mainmain¬ Or or at[at] additionalabout additionalabout We We his his thank thank studies, studies, data data Wilbert Wilbert ; and and Eugene Eugene Aronow, Aronow, methodological methodological Oddone, Oddone, MD, MD, MD, MD, for for information information MHS,providing providingMHS, -for for heart heart disease disease or or patients patients undergoing undergoing propro¬ _—_ cracked cracked tubing7" tubing” will will significantly significantly reduce reduce his his helpful helpful comments comments on on earlier earlier drafts drafts of of this this laxiscedures cedures wouldfor for bewhich which indicated.endocarditis endocarditis prophyprophy¬ _ accuracy.cause accuracy. small Large Large earpieces are earpiecescan be[are] occluded better, better, be[be¬] _ article, article,the preparation and[and] Ms[Ms] Sharon[Sharon] of the manuscript Smith[Smith] for[for] her[her] and assistance[assistance] tables. in[in] laxis would be indicated. cause small earpieces earpieces can be occluded by by _‘“he Preparation of the manuscript and tables. ARE AREEVER EVER SYSTOLIC SYSTOLICNORMAL? NORMAL? MURMURS MURMURS the the ditory ditoryAt At : sharp sharp the the[meatus.3] meatus? bedside, bedside. bony bony angle angle eliminate elimiat at the the background externalback external auau¬ d Weber References1. References1. Ballard BallardVP, DJ, DJ,Melton Khanderia KhanderiaLJ. . Population-based BK, BK, Tajik Tajik ; AJ, AJ, Seward Sewardstudy JB, JB,of In In unreferred unreferred young young adults, adults, the the prevapreva¬ | noise noiset whenever whenever the bedside, possible. possible. e iminate If Ifbackground background ackgroun _ Weberechocardiography: echocardiography: VP, Meltontime[time] LJ. trends[trends] Population-basedin[in] utilization[utilization] study and[and] di[di-] of toin toin lence lence 86% 52%'0, 86%52%iwi264; of ofto to systolic systolic100%. 100%.&fi7 echocardiography echocardiography murmurs murmursEchocardiography chocardlograpny ranges ranges is is from5% from normal normal 5%is 1s noiseexamination noiseexamination Finally, inauly, is is unavoidable, unavoidable,[relate] relatein in a a quieter quieter your your try tryclinical[clinical] to to setting. setting. repeat repeatfindings linaing your your —_— agnosticporVariability agnosticnol2.VariabilityRushmerAssess istess profile profile Hee Health in[in] RF, detection[detection] ofan[of][ an] SparkmanCare. Care. evolving evolving eeand[and] 1989;5:249-261.DR, interpretation interpretation technology. technology. ete, Polley RFL, Int[Int] RELof[of][ J] J heart[ heart][ Tech-] Techet tal al. normal normal in in 90% 90% to to 94% 94% of of pregnant pregnant women women __ to to the the results results of of assessments assessments by by a a colcol¬ murmurs. murmurs. Am Am J J Dis Dis Child. Child. 1952;83:740-754. 1952;83:740-754. with with forpatients forpatients testing. testing.23·26·68 systolic systolic +[or] or 232668[residents] residents murmursmurmursIn In elderly elderly whoof[of] wholong-term long-term are medical medical are referred referred °[care] careout out¬ . _ league,gram league,gram agreements agreements whenever[whenever] a[a] cardiologist, cardiologist, between[between] possible. possible. * your or your[or] an Resolving Resolving[an] assessments[assessments] echocardio[echocardio¬] * dis[dis¬] an —_‘Mass:4.agnosis, 3.Mass:4.agnosis. Constant Constant Sapira SapiraLittle LittleBaltimore, Baltimore, JD. JD. % J.Brown BedsideBrownThe Art TheBedsideArt Md: &[Md:] andStooge. CoandCardiology. ‘0Urban[Urban] Inc; Ine; Science Science1985. &[&] Schwarzenberg; Schwarzenberg; . 3rd of 3rdof Bedside Bedside ed. ed. Boston, Boston, DiDifacilities, facilities,[the] the prevalence prevalence[of] of systolic systolic murmur¬ and _and those those of of others others is is an an excellent excellent way way —_ 1990. 1990. murs murs ranges ranges from fromis 29%' 29% normalto to 60%"; 60%G9"71;in 44%echo¬ echoto of of upgrading upgrading your your clinical clinical skills. skills. 5. 5.physical Chatterjee K. Chatterjee[examination.] K. Bedside Bedside[In:] evaluation evaluationChatterjee of of theK, the heart: heart:[et] al,[eds.] the the in cardiographyin ‘ 100%.26·27'31·72·73 100% the the282731. elderly elderly Thiscan Thiscan be be wide wide partially partially range range ; explained explained of of normal normal FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONSFURTHER RECOMMENDATIONSRESEARCH RESEARCH FOR FOR Philadeh'tia6. Philadelphia,6.Cardiology: Marriot Marriot It HJ. HJ. HJ.[An] Pa:[Pa:] Bedside Bedside JB[Illustrated][JB] Liopineott: Lippincott; Bedside Cardiac CardiacText/Reference. Candice 1991[1991.] Diagnosis. Diagnosis. Diganosis. :[Vol] PhilaPhilaPhi[1.] . byechocardiograms.normalities normalitiesechocardiograms.by[variable] variablewes in instudy studythe the Commonly Commonlyelderly elderly[definitions] definitions were were detected[detected][of] of left left[normal] normal ven¬ ven- ab[ ab¬] _nior_ niorcal cal Most Most examinations. examinations. cardiology cardiologystudies studies. A fellows fellows toused usedThere There cardiologists cardiologists to conduct conductare are few few theclinithe data data or or clini¬ on se¬ seon gis,new7_delphia, delphia,newsis.7. Leach[Leach] Lancet, Lancet. Clinical clinical Pa:[Pa:] RM, RM, JB1990.335:1199-1201.indicator indicator1990;335:1199-1201.[JB] McBrien McBrien Lippincott; Lippincott; of of the the DJ. DJ. severity 1991:19.[1991:19.] severityBrachioradial Brachioradial of of aortic aortic delay: delay: stenostenoa[a] tricular tricular systolic systolic dysfunction, dysfunction, aortic aortic stestethe the precision precision and and accuracy accuracy of of the the clinical clinical 8, 8. Chun Chun PKC, PKC, Dunn Dunn BE. BE. Clinical Clinical clue clue of of severe[severe] aor[aor-] 570 JAMA. Februarv 19. 1997—Vol 277. No. 7 Abnormal Systolic Murmur—Etchells et al **Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 03/21/2016**

<!-- page: 8 -->

tic tic stenosis: stenosis: simultaneous simultaneous palpation palpation of of the the carotid carotid and and 32. 32. Gaasch Gaasch WH, WH, John John RM, RM, Aurigemma Aurigemma GP. GP. ManagManagand and echocardiography. echocardiography. South South Med Med J. J. 1990;83:12661990;83:1266\x=req-\ apical apical impulses. impulses. Arch[Arch] Intern[ Intern] Med.[ Med.] 1982;142:2284-2288. 1982;142:2284-2288. ing ing asymptomatic asymptomatic patients patients with[with] chronic[chronic] mitral[mitral] re[re-] 1269. 1269. 9. 9. Levine Levine SA. SA. The The systolic systolic murmur:[murmur:] its its clinical[clinical] sigsiggurgitation. gurgitation. Chest.[Chest.] 1995;108:842-847. 1995;108:842-847. 54. 54. Abbasi Abbasi AS, AS, DeCristofaro DeCristofaro D, D, Anabtawi Anabtawi J, J, Irwin Irwin nificance. nificance. JAMA. JAMA. 1933;101:436-438. 1933;101:436-438. 33. 33. Dajani Dajani AS, AS, Bisno Bisno AL, AL, Chung Chung KJ, KJ, et[et] al. al. PrevenPrevenL. L. Mitral Mitral valve valve prolapse: prolapse: comparative comparative value value of of M- M-$ 10. 10. Freeman Freeman AR, AR, Levine Levine SA. SA. The The clinical clinical signifisignifition tion of of bacterial bacterial endocarditis: endocarditis: recommendations recommendations by by mode, mode, two-dimensional[two-dimensional] and[and] Doppler Doppler echocardiograechocardiogracance cance of of the the systolic systolic murmur: murmur: a a study study of of 1000 1000 conconthe the American American Heart Heart Association. Association. JAMA. JAMA. 1990;264: 1990;264: phy. phy.[J] J[ Am] Am Coll[Coll] Cardiol.[Cardiol.] 1983;2:1219-1223. 1983;2:1219-1223. secutive secutive cardiac cardiac cases. cases. Ann Ann Intern Intern Med. Med. 1933;6:13711933;6:1371\x=req-\ 2919-2922. 2919-2922. 55. 55. Barron Barron JT, JT, Manrose Manrose DL, DL, Liebson Liebson PR. PR. CompariCompari1385. 1385. 34. 34. Seneviratne Seneviratne B, B, Morre Morre GA, GA, West West PD. PD. Effect Effect of of son son of of auscultation auscultation with with two-dimensional two-dimensional and and DopDop11. 11. Rivero-Carvailho Rivero-Carvallho JM. JM. Signo Signo para para el el diagnostico diagnostico captopril captopril on[on] functional[ functional] mitral[ mitral] regurgitation regurgitation in[in] dilated[ dilated] pler pler echocardiography echocardiography in[in] patients patients with[with] suspected suspected mi[mi-] de de las las insufficiencias insufficiencias tricuspideas. tricuspideas. Arch Arch Inst Inst Cardiol Cardiol heart heart failure: failure: a a randomized randomized double double blind blind placebo placebo con[con-] tral tral valve valve prolapse. prolapse. Clin Clin Cardiol. Cardiol. 1988;11:401-406. 1988;11:401-406. Mex. Mex. 1946;16:531-540. 1946;16:531-540. trolled trolled trial. trial. Br Br Heart Heart J. J. 1994;72:63-68. 1994;72:63-68. 56. 56. Retchin Retchin SM, SM, Waugh Waugh RA, RA, Fletcher Fletcher RH. RH. The The imim12. 12. Maisel Maisel A, A, Atwood Atwood JE, JE, Goldberger Goldberger AL. AL. HepatoHepato35. 35. Meyers Meyers DG, DG, McCall McCall D, D, Sears Sears TD, TD, Olson Olson TS, TS, Felix Felix pact pact of[of] echocardiographic echocardiographic results[results] on[on] treatment[treatment] de[de-] jugular jugular reflux:[reflux:] useful[useful] in[in] the[ the][ bedside] bedside diagnosis diagnosis of[of] tri[ tri-] GL. GL. Duplex Duplex pulsed pulsed Doppler Doppler echocardiography echocardiography in in mimicisions cisions for for patients patients suspected suspected of of mitral mitral valve valve proprocuspid cuspid regurgitation. regurgitation. Ann[Ann] Intern[ Intern] Med.[ Med.] 1984;101:7811984;101:781\x=req-\ tral tral regurgitation. regurgitation. J J Clin Clin Ultrasound. Ultrasound. 1986;14:1171986;14:117\x=req-\ lapse. lapse. Med[Med] Care.[Care.] 1987;25:652-657. 1987;25:652-657. 782. 782. 121. 121. 57. 57. Nishimura Nishimura RA, RA, McGoon McGoon MD, MD, Shub Shub C, C, Miller Miller FA FA 13. 13. Lembo Lembo NJ, NJ, Dell’Italia Dell'Italia LJ, LJ, Crawford Crawford MH, MH, 36. 36. Rahko Rahko PS. PS. Prevalence Prevalence of of regurgitant regurgitant murmurs[murmurs] Jr, Jr, Ilstrup Ilstrup DM, DM,Tajik Tajik[AJ.] AJ. Echocardiographically docuEchocardiographically[docu-] O’Rourke O'Rourke RA. RA. Diagnosis Diagnosis of of left-sided left-sided regurgitant regurgitant in in patients patients with with valvular valvular regurgitation regurgitation detected detected by by mented mented mitral-valve mitral-valve prolapse: prolapse: long-term long-term follow-up follow-up of of murmurs murmurs of of transient transient arterial arterial occlusion: occlusion: a a new new mamaDoppler Doppler echocardiography. echocardiography. Ann[Ann] Intern[Intern] Med.[Med.] 1989; 1989; 237 237 patients. patients. N N Engl Engl J J Med. Med. 1985;313:1305-1309. 1985;313:1305-1309. neuver neuver using using blood blood pressure pressure cuffs. cuffs. Ann Ann Intern Intern Med. Med. 111:466-472. 111:466-472. 58. 58. Orencia Orencia AJ, AJ, Petty Petty GW, GW, Khanderia Khanderia BK, BK, et et al. al. Risk Risk 1986;105:368-370. 1986;105:368-370. 37. 37. Lehmann Lehmann KG, KG, Francis Francis CK, CK, Dodge Dodge HT, HT, and and the the of of stroke stroke with with mitral mitral valve valve prolapse prolapse in in populationpopulation14. 14. Sharpey-Schafer Sharpey-Schafer EP. EP. Effects Effects of of squatting squatting on[on] the the TIMI TIMI study study group. group. Mitral Mitral regurgitation regurgitation in in early early myomyobased based cohort cohort survey. survey. Stroke. Stroke. 1995;26:7-13. 1995;26:7-13. normal normal and and failing failing circulation. circulation. BMJ. BMJ. 1956;1:1072-1074. 1956;1:1072-1074. cardial cardial infarction: infarction: incidence, incidence, clinical clinical detection, detection, and and 59. 59. Marks Marks AR, AR, Choong Choong CY, CY, Sanfilippo Sanfilippo AJ, AJ, Ferre Ferre M, M, 15. 15. Ravin Ravin A, A, Craddock Craddock LD, LD, Wolf Wolf PS, PS, Shander Shander D, D, ed. ed. prognostic prognostic implications. implications. Ann[Ann] Intern[Intern] Med.[Med.] 1992;117: 1992;117: Weyman Weyman AE.[AE.][ Identification] Identification of[ of] high-risk high-risk and[and] low-risk[ low-risk] Auscultation Auscultation of of the the Heart. Heart. 3rd 3rd ed. ed. Chicago, Chicago, Ill: Ill: MosbyMosby-$ 10-17. 10-17. subgroups subgroups of[of] patients patients with[with] mitral[mitral] valve[valve] prolapse. prolapse. Year Year Book; Book; 1977:2:45-67. 1977:2:45-67. 38. 38. Kinney Kinney EL. EL. Causes Causes of of false-negative false-negative auscultaauscultaN N Engl Engl J J Med. Med. 1989;320:1031-1036. 1989;320:1031-1036. 16. 16. Taranta Taranta A, A, Spagnuolo Spagnuolo M, M, Snyder Snyder R, R, Gerbarg Gerbarg DS, DS, tion tion ‘of of regurgitant regurgitant lesions: lesions: a[a] Doppler Doppler echocardioechocardio60. 60. Tofler Tofler OB, OB, Tofler Tofler GH. GH. Use Use of of auscultation auscultation to[to] Hofler Hofler JJ. JJ. Auscultation Auscultation of of the the heart heart by by physicians physicians graphic graphic study study of[of] 294[294] patients. patients. J[J] Gen[Gen] Intern[Intern] Med.[Med.] follow follow patients patients with with mitral mitral systolic systolic clicks clicks and and mur[mur-] and and by by computer. computer. In: In: Data Data Acquisition Acquisition and and ProcessProcess1988;3:429-434, 1988;3:429-434. murs. murs. Am Am J J Cardiol. Cardiol. 1990;66:1355-1358. 1990;66:1355-1358. ing ing in[in] Biology Biology and[and] Medicine, Medicine, Vol[Vol] 3.[3.][New] New York, York, NY:[NY:] 39. 39. Buda Buda A, A, Mackenzie Mackenzie G, G, Wigle Wigle D. D. The The Mueller Mueller 61. 61. Zuppiroli Zuppiroli A, A, Rinaldi Rinaldi M, M, Kramer-Fox Kramer-Fox R, R, FavilliS, Favilli S, Macmillan Maemillan Publishing Publishing Co Co Inc; Inc; 1964:23-52. 1964:23-52. maneuver maneuver in in muscular muscular subaortic subaortic stenosis. stenosis. CirculaCirculaRoman Roman MJ, MJ, Devereux Devereux RB. RB. Natural Natural history history of of mitral mitral 17. 17. Panidis Panidis JP, JP, McAllister McAllister M, M, RossJ, RossJ, Mintz Mintz GS. GS. PrevaPrevation. tion. 1977;56(supp! 1977;56(suppl 3):III-138. 3):III-138. Abstract. Abstract. valve valve prolapse. prolapse. Am Am J J Cardiol. Cardiol. 1995;75:1028-1032. 1995;75:1028-1032. lence lence and and severity severity of of mitral mitral regurgitation regurgitation inthe in the mi-_ mi40. 40. Nellen Nellen M, M, Gotsman Gotsman MS, MS, Vogeipoel Vogelpoel L, L, Beck Beck W, W, 62. 62. McCracken McCracken D, D, Everett Everett JE. JE. An An investigation investigation of of tral tral valve valve prolapse prolapse syndrome: syndrome: a[a] Doppler Doppler echocardioechocardioSchrire Schrire V. V. Effects Effects of of prompt prompt squatting squatting on[on] the the syssysthe the incidence incidence of of cardiac cardiac murmurs murmurs in in young young healthy healthy graphic graphic study study of[of] 80[80] patients. patients.[J] J Am[Am] Coll[Coll] Cardiol.[Cardiol.] tolie tolic murmur murmur in in idiopathic idiopathic hypertrophic hypertrophic obstructive obstructive women. women. Practitioner. Practitioner. 1976;216:308-309. 1976;216:308-309. 1986;7:975-981. 1986;7:975-981. cardiomyopathy. cardiomyopathy. BMJ.[BMJ.] 1967;3:140-143. 1967;3:140-143. 63. 63. Stewart Stewart IMG. IMG. Systolic Systolic murmurs[murmurs] in in 525 525 healthy healthy 18. 18. Raftery Raftery EB, EB, Holland Holland WW. WW. Examination Examination into into the the 41. 41. Braunwald Braunwald E, E, Oldham Oldham HN HN Jr, Jr, Ross Ross J J Jr, Jr, Linhart Linhart young young adults.[adults.] Br[Br] Heart[Heart] J.[J.] 1951;13:561-565. 1951;13:561-565. heart: heart: an an investigation investigation into into variation. variation. Am Am J J EpideEpideJW, JW, Mason[Mason] DT, DT, Fort[Fort][ L] L[ III.] III. The[The] circulatory circulatory response response 64, 64. Vaughan Vaughan JP. JP. Blood Blood pressure pressure and and heart heart murmurs[murmurs] miol. miol. 1967;85:438-444. 1967;85:438-444. of of patients patients with with idiopathic idiopathic hypertrophic hypertrophic subaortic subaortic in in a[a] rural rural population population in in the the United United Republic Republic of of TanTan19. 19. Forssell Forssell G, G, Jonasson Jonasson R, R, Orinius Orinius E. E. Identifying Identifying stenosis stenosis to to nitroglycerin nitroglycerin and and the the Valsalva Valsalva maneuver. maneuver. zania. zania. Bull Bull World World Health Health Organ. Organ. 1979;57:89-97. 1979;57:89-97. severe severe aortic aortic valvular valvular stenosis stenosis by by bedside bedside examinaexaminaCirculation. Circulation. 1964;29:422-431. 1964;29:422-431. 65. 65. Cotter Cotter L, L, Logan Logan RL, RL, Poole Poole A. A. Innocent Innocent systolic systolic tion. tion. Acta Acta Med Med Scand. Scand. 1985;218:397-400. 1985;218:397-400. 42, 42. Kramer Kramer DS, DS, French French WJ, WJ, Criley Criley JM. JM. The The postexpostexmurmurs murmurs in in healthy healthy 40-year-old 40-year-old men. men.J J R R Coll Coll PhyPhy20. 20. Dobrow Dobrow RJ, RJ, Calatayud Calatayud JB, JB, Abraham Abraham S, S, Caceres Caceres trasystolic trasystolic murmur[murmur] response response to[to] gradient gradient in[in] hyperhypersicians sicians London. London. 1980;14:128-129. 1980;14:128-129. CA. CA. A A study study of of physician physician variation variation in in heart heart sound sound trophic trophic cardiomyopathy. cardiomyopathy. Ann[Ann] Intern[ Intern] Med.[Med.] 1986;104: 1986;104: 66. 66. Markiewicz Markiewicz W, W, Stoner Stoner J, J, London London E, E, Hunt Hunt SA, SA, interpretation. interpretation. Med[Med] Annu[ Annu] Dist[ Dist] Columbia.[ Columbia.] July July 1964.[1964.] 772-776. 772-776. Popp Popp RL.[RL.][ Mitral] Mitral valve[valve] prolapse prolapse in[in] one[one][ hundred] hundred prepre21. 21. Spodick Spodick DH, DH, Sugiura Sugiura T, Doi Y, Paladino D, Haffty 43. Petrin TJ, Tavel ME. Idiopathic hypertrophic sumably healthy young[females.][Circulation.] 1976; BG. BG. Rate Rate of of rise rise of of the the carotid carotid T, Doi pulse: pulse: Y, Paladinoan an investigation investigation D, Haffty 43.subaortic subaortic Petrin stenosis stenosisTJ, Tavel as as observed observed ME. Idiopathic in in a[a] large large hypertrophic community community sumably53:464-473. 53:464-473. healthy young females. Circulation. 1976; of of observer observer error error in in a a common common clinical clinical measurement. measurement. hospital. hospital.[J] J Am[Am] Geriatr[Geriatr] Soc.[Soc.] 1979;27:43-46. 1979;27:43-46. 67. 67. Tan Tan CC, CC, Hiew Hiew TM. TM. Innocent Innocent systolic systolic murmurs[murmurs] in in Am Am J J Cardiol. Cardiol. 1982;49:159-162. 1982;49:159-162. 44. 44. Rosenblum Rosenblum R, R, Delman Delman AJ. AJ. Valsalva’s Valsalva's maneuver[maneuver] healthy healthy young young males:[males:] a[a] study study of[of] the[ the] characteristics[characteristics] 22. 22. Holleman Holleman DR, DR, Simel Simel DL. DL. Does Does the the clinical clinical ex[ex-] and and the the systolic systolic murmur[murmur] of of hypertrophic hypertrophic subaortic subaortic and and prevalence prevalence in in the the SAF SAF pre-enlistee pre-enlistee population. population. amination amination predict predict airflow airflow limitation? limitation? JAMA. JAMA. 1995; 1995; stenosis. stenosis. Am Am J J Cardiol. Cardiol. 1965;15:868-870. 1965;15:868-870. Singapore Singapore Med[Med][ J.] J. 1988;29:337-340. 1988;29:337-340. 278:318-319. 273:313-319. 45. 45. Stefadouros Stefadouros MA, MA, Mucha Mucha E, E,[Frank] Frank[ MJ.] MJ.[ Paradoxic] Paradoxic 68. 68. Northcote Northcote RJ, RJ, Knight Knight PV, PV, Ballantyne Ballantyne D. D. SysSys23. 23. Mishra Mishra M, M, Chambers Chambers JB, JB, Jackson Jackson G. G. Murmurs Murmurs in in response response of[of] the[ the] murmur[murmur] of[of] idiopathic[ idiopathic] hypertrophic[hypertrophic] tolic tolic murmurs murmurs in in pregnancy: pregnancy: value value of of echocardioechocardiopregnancy: pregnancy: an[an][ audit] audit[ of] ofechocardiography.[echocardiography.] BMJ.[ BMJ.] 1992; 1992; subaortic subaortic stenosis stenosis[to] to the the Valsalva Valsalva maneuver. maneuver. Am Am J J graphic graphic assessment.[assessment.] Clin[Clin] Cardiol.[Cardiol.] 1985;8:327-328. 1985;8:327-328. 304:1413-1414. 304:1413-1414. Cardiol. Cardiol. 1976;37:89-92. 1976;37:89-92. 69. 69. Bethel Bethel CS, CS, Crow Crow EW. EW. Heart Heart sounds sounds in in the the aged. aged. 24. 24. Ahuja Ahuja IM. IM. Functional Functional systolic systolic murmurs. murmurs. Indian Indian 46. 46. Bartall Bartall H, H, Amber Amber S, S, Desser Desser KB, KB, Benchimol Benchimol A. A. Am Am J J Cardiol. Cardiol. 1963;11:763-767. 1963;11:763-767. Heart Heart J. J. 1982;34:241-244. 1982;34:241-244. Normalization of Normalization ofthe the external external carotid carotid pulse pulse tracing tracing of of 70. 70. Bruns Bruns DL, DL, Van Van Der Der Hauwaert Hauwaert LG. LG. The The aortic aortic 25. 25. Lockhart Lockhart PB, PB, Crist Crist D, D, Stone Stone PH. PH. The The reliability reliability hypertrophic hypertrophic subaortic[subaortic] stenosis[stenosis] during during Muller’s[Muller's] ma[ma-] systolic systolic murmur[murmur] developing developing with[with] increased[increased] age. age. Br[Br] of of the the medical medical history history in in the the identification identification of patients of patients neuver. neuver. Chest. Chest. 1978;74:77-78. 1978;74:77-78. Heart Heart J. J. 1958;20:370-378. 1958;20:370-378. at at risk risk for for infective infective endocarditis. endocarditis. J J Am Am Dental Dental Assoc.[ Assoc.] 47, 47. Cassidy Cassidy J, J, Aronow WS, Aronow WS, Prakash Prakash R. R. The The effect effect of of 71. 71. Griffiths Griffiths RA, RA, Sheldon Sheldon MG. MG. The The clinical clinical signifisignifi1989;119:417-422. 1989;119:417-422. isometric exercise isometric exercise on on the the systolic systolic murmur murmur of of patients patients cance cance of of systolic systolic murmurs murmurs in in the the elderly. elderly. Age Age Ageing. Ageing. 26. 26. Xu Xu M, M, McHaffie McHaffie DJ. DJ. Nonspecific Nonspecific systolic systolic murmurwith with idiopathic idiopathic hypertrophic hypertrophic subaortic subaortic stenosis. stenosis. Chest. Chest. 1975;4:99-104. 1975;4:99-104. murs: murs: an an audit audit of of the the clinical clinical value value of of echocardiogechocardiog1975;67:395-397. 1975;67:395-397. 72. 72. Perez Perez GL, GL, Jacob Jacob M, M, Bhat Bhat PK, PK, Rao Rao DB, DB, Luisada Luisada raphy. raphy. N[N] Z[ Z] Med[Med] J.[J.] 1993;106:54-56. 1993;106:54-56. 48. 48. Battle Battle WE, WE, Siegel Siegel FA, FA, Fox Fox LM. LM. The The older older papaAA. AA. Incidence Incidence of of murmurs murmurs in in the the aging aging heart. heart. J J Am Am 27. 27. Aronow Aronow WS, WS, Kronzon Kronzon I. I. Correlation Correlation of of prevaprevatient tient with with idiopathic idiopathic hypertrophic hypertrophic subaortic subaortic stenosis. stenosis. Geriatr Geriatr Soc. Soc. 1976;24:29-31. 1976;24:29-31. lence lence and and severity severity of of valvular valvular aortic aortic stenosis stenosis deterdeterGeriatrics. Geriatrics. 1977;1:61-69. 1977;1:61-69. 73. 73. Knight Knight PV, PV, Martin Martin BJ, BJ, Ballantyne Ballantyne D. D. EchocarEchocarmined mined by by continuous-wave continuous-wave Doppler Doppler echocardiograechocardiogra49. 49. Klein Klein HO, HO, DiSegni DiSegni E, E, Dean Dean H, H, Beker Beker B, B, Bakst Bakst A, A, diographic diographic diagnoses diagnoses in[in] elderly elderly patients patients with[with] systolic systolic phy phy with[with] physical physical signs signs of[of] aortic[ aortic] stenosis[stenosis] in[in] patients patients Kaplinsky Kaplinsky E.[E.] Increased[Increased] intensity intensity of the[of][ the] murmur[murmur] of[of] murmurs murmurs and and cardiac cardiac disease. disease. Age Age Ageing. Ageing. 1986;15: 1986;15: aged aged 62[62] to[to] 100[100] years years with[with] aortic[aortic] systolic systolic ejection ejection hypertrophic hypertrophic obstructive[obstructive] cardiomyopathy cardiomyopathy with[with] ca[ca-] 169-173. 169-173. murmurs. murmurs. Am Am J J Cardiol. Cardiol. 1987;60:399-401. 1987;60:399-401. rotid rotid sinus sinus pressure. pressure. Chest. Chest. 1988;93:814-820. 1988;93:814-820. 74, 74. Bujack Bujack W, W, Gioia Gioia F, F, Cayler Cayler GG. GG. An An innocent innocent thrill: thrill: 28. 28. Hoagland Hoagland PM, PM, Cook Cook EF, EF, Wynne Wynne J, J, Goldman Goldman L. L. 50. 50. Perloff Perloff JK, JK, Child Child JS, JS, Edwards Edwards JE. JE. New New guideguidea a common common finding finding with with an an innocent innocent murmur. murmur. JAMA. JAMA. Value Value of of noninvasive[noninvasive] testing testing in in adults adults with with suspected suspected lines lines for for the the clinical clinical diagnosis diagnosis of of mitral mitral valve valve propro1976;235:2417, 1976;235:2417. aortic aortic stenosis. stenosis. Am Am J J Med. Med. 1986;80:1041-1050. 1986;80:1041-1050. lapse. lapse.[Am] Am J[J][ Cardiol.] Cardiol. 1986;57:1124-1129. 1986;57:1124-1129. 15. 75. Oddone Oddone EZ, EZ, Waugh Waugh RA, RA, Samsa Samsa G, G, Corey Corey R, R, 29. 29. Lembo Lembo NJ, NJ, Dell’Italia Dell'Italia LJ, LJ, Crawford Crawford MH, MH, 51. 51. Devereux Devereux RB, Kramer-Fox RB, Kramer-Fox R, R, Shear Shear K, K, Kligfield Kligfield Feussner Feussner JR. JR. Teaching Teaching cardiovascular cardiovascular examination examination O’Rourke O'Rourke RA. RA. Bedside Bedside diagnosis diagnosis of of systolic systolic mur[mur-] P, P, Pini[Pini] R, R, Savage Savage DD.[DD.] Diagnosis Diagnosis and[and] classification[ classification] of[ of] _ skills: skills: results results from from a a randomized randomized controlled controlled trial. trial. Am Am murs. murs. N N Engl Engl J J Med. Med. 1988;318:1572-1578. 1988;318:1572-1578. severity severity of[of] mitral[ mitral] valve[valve] prolapse: prolapse: methodologic, methodologic, bio[bio-] J J Med. Med. 1993;95:389-396. 1993;95:389-396. 30. 30. Jaffe Jaffe WM, WM, Roche Roche AHG, AHG, Coverdale Coverdale HA, HA, McAliMcAlilogic, logic,[and] and prognostic prognostic[consideration.] consideration.[ Am] Am Heart[ Heart][ J.] J. 1987; 1987; 76. 76. Ewy Ewy GA, GA, Felner Feiner JM, JM, Juul Juul D, D, Mayer Mayer JW, JW, Sajid Sajid ster ster HF, HF, Ormiston JA, Ormiston JA, Greene Greene ER. ER. Clinical Clinical evaluaevalua113:1265-1280. 113:1265-1280. AW, AW, Waugh Waugh RA.[RA.] Test[Test] of[of] a[ a] cardiology cardiology patient patient simu[simu-] tion tion versus versus Doppler Doppler echocardiography echocardiography in in the the quanquan52. 52. Devereux Devereux RB, RB, Kramer-Fox Kramer-Fox R, R, Brown Brown WT, WT, et et al. al. lator lator with with students students in in fourth fourth year year electives. electives. J J Med Med titative titative assessment assessment of of valvular valvular heart heart disease. disease. Relation Relation between between clinical clinical features features of of the the mitral mitral valve valve Educ. Educ. 1987;62:738-743. 1987;62:738-743. Circulation. Circulation. 1988;78:267-275. 1988;78:267-275. prolapse prolapse syndrome syndrome and[and] echocardiographically echocardiographically docu[docu-] 77. 77. Abella Abella M, M, FormoloJ, Formolo J, Penney Penney DG. DG. Comparison Comparison of of 31. 31. McKillop McKillop GM, GM, Stewart Stewart DA, DA, Burns Burns JMA, JMA, BallanBallanmented mented mitral mitral valve valve prolapse. prolapse. / J Am Am Coll Coll Cardiol. Cardiol. the the acoustic acoustic properties properties of of six six popular popular stethoscopes. stethoscopes. tyne tyne D.[D.] Doppler Doppler echocardiography echocardiography in[ in] elderly elderly patients patients 1986;8:763-772. 1986;8:763-772. J J Acoust Acoust Soe Soc Am. Am. 1992;91:2224-2228. 1992;91:2224-2228. with with ejection ejection systolic systolic murmurs. murmurs. Postgrad Postgrad Med Med J. J. 1991; 1991; 53. 53. Olive Olive KE, KE, Grassman Grassman ED. ED. Mitral Mitral valve valve prolapse: prolapse: 78. 78. Orton Orton D, D, Stryker Stryker R. R. Sick Sick stethoscope stethoscope syndrome. syndrome. 61:1059-1061. 61:1059-1061. comparison comparison[of] of diagnosis diagnosis by by physical physical examination[examination] JAMA. JAMA. 1986;256:2817. 1986;256:2817. JAMA. Februarv 19. 1997-—Vol 277. No. 7 Abnormal Systolic Murmur—Etcheils et al 571 **Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 03/21/2016**
